The Project Gutenberg EBook of American Missionary, Volume 43, No. 5, May,
1889, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: American Missionary, Volume 43, No. 5, May, 1889

Author: Various

Release Date: June 23, 2005 [EBook #16118]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN MISSIONARY ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Donald
Perry and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net





THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

May, 1889

VOL. XLIII. NO. 5.




CONTENTS


EDITORIAL.
  FINANCIAL
  CENTENNIAL
  CONGREGATIONALISM IN GEORGIA
  NOTES FROM THE SOUTH
  ILLUMINATED SPOTS
  THE GOVERNMENT AND THE INDIANS
  NOTES FROM NEW ENGLAND
  WHAT THE WORLD SAYS
  PARAGRAPHS
  SOUTHERN ECHOES
  BOOK NOTICE

THE SOUTH.
  THE GEORGIA CONGREGATIONAL ASSOCIATION
  EVANGELISTIC LABORS
  THOMASVILLE, GA.
  DEATH OF MRS. BENNETT

THE INDIANS.
  PERILS OF MISSIONARY LIFE
  FIRST FRUITS

THE CHINESE.
  LOS ANGELES CONGREGATIONAL CHINESE MISSION

BUREAU OF WOMAN'S WORK.
  WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION
  ALABAMA ASSOCIATION
  THREE NEW ORGANIZATIONS IN THE SOUTH

OUR YOUNG FOLKS.
  HOW THE PENNIES GREW

RECEIPTS

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Rooms, 56 Reade Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price, 50 Cents a Year, in Advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second-class matter.

       *       *       *       *       *


American Missionary Association.


President, Rev. WM. M. Taylor, D.D., LL.D., N.Y.


_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. A.J.F. BEHRENDS, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. ALEX. McKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. D.O. MEARS, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.


_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._

  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Treasurer._

  H.W. HUBBARD, Esq., _56 Reade Street, N.Y._


_Auditors._

  PETER McCARTEE.
  CHAS. P. PEIRCE.


_Executive Committee._

  JOHN H. WASHBURN, Chairman.
  ADDISON P. FOSTER, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

  J.E. RANKIN,
  WM. H. WARD,
  J.W. COOPER,
  JOHN H. WASHBURN,
  EDMUND L. CHAMPLIN.

  _For Two Years._

  LYMAN ABBOTT,
  CHAS. A. HULL,
  CLINTON B. FISK,
  ADDISON P. FOSTER.

  _For One Year._

  S.B. HALLIDAY,
  SAMUEL HOLMES,
  SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
  CHARLES L. MEAD,
  ELBERT B. MONROE.


_District Secretaries._

  Rev. C.J. RYDER, _21 Cong'l House, Boston._
  Rev. J.E. ROY, D.D., _151 Washington. Street, Chicago._


_Financial Secretary for Indian Missions._

  Rev. CHAS. W. SHELTON.


_Field Superintendents._

  Rev. FRANK E. JENKINS.
  Prof. EDWARD S. HALL.


_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

  Miss D.E. EMERSON, _56 Reade St., N.Y._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, 56 Reade Street, New York, or, when
more convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational
House, Boston, Mass., or 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill. A payment
of thirty dollars at one time constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label," indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward, the change on the label will appear a month later. Please
send early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former
address and the new address, in order that our periodicals and
occasional papers may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I bequeath to my executor (or executors) the sum of ---- dollars, in
trust, to pay the same in ---- days after my decease to the person who,
when the same is payable, shall act as Treasurer of the 'American
Missionary Association,' of New York City, to be applied, under the
direction of the Executive Committee of the Association, to its
charitable uses and purposes." The Will should be attested by three
witnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.


VOL. XLIII.        MAY, 1889.          NO. 5.


American Missionary Association.

       *       *       *       *       *


FINANCIAL.

THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY presents its greetings for the month of May. Six
months of our fiscal year are now in the past. The half year which we
anticipate includes the summer time, when many of the friends of the
ignorant millions to whom we are sent, are absent from their churches.
The months of May and June ought to swell the stream of love and service
against the season when the demand will continue and income will be
small.

We appealed last month for an increase of the contributions in _church_
collections. We renew and emphasize that appeal, for these collections
are the steady streams on which we rely to keep in motion the wheels of
the large and ever enlarging work of the Association. We believe that
the interest in this great work is on the increase. We rejoice that "the
most prolific missionary field ever opened to any Christian people--
right here at our doors," is gaining upon the interest and benevolence
of the churches year by year. Never were the friends of the cause mote
responsive; never was the work more hopeful. The work enlarges, and the
people's faith enlarges. Their gifts to Christ for his poor were never
freer.

We have been greatly favored with special gifts. Every one of them is
needed. It is a blessed thing that one can plant his benevolences in
some special institution or feature of work, and know that the
influences are to follow on after the giver has gone to a higher world.
But we do hope that the CHURCHES OF CHRIST, AS CHURCHES, will not fail
to keep step with the providences of God in their church contributions.

It is also true that some fear that the day of LEGACIES is to come to an
end. Indeed, there are those who take a solemn comfort in bewailing and
fearing that everything is to come to an end. They mix a pound of
forebodings with an ounce of faith. If, for some unseen reasons in the
movements of life and death, legacies do not appear with the regularity
of insurance tables, they think the day of legacies is dead.
Nevertheless legacies will continue as long as Christians pass from
earth to heaven. There will always be faithful souls who will remember
Christ and his cause in their wills. There will always be those who may
not be able to divide their estates and to dispose of portions of them
while they live, who will yet provide that they may see their works
following them, when they shall look down from a world redeemed, to a
world for whose redemption Christ lived and died. There will always be
legacies, and the American Missionary Association, so long as it follows
in the steps of Christ in such mission as it has, will not be forgotten.
The legacies will come, because they ought to come. The people of God
will remember this work in their wills because they ought to do this,
and God will take care that what Christian stewards ought to do, shall
be done.

We thank God for SPECIAL GIFTS. We thank God for LEGACIES. We also thank
God for the ability and faith and sacrifices of those who cannot plant
institutions or build or endow schools, but who live and give that which
provides for the unceasing CURRENT EXPENSES. Almost every one can do a
little more, and it is the many littles that make the difference between
a debt with a crippled work, and freedom from debt with healthful
growth. All along the lines, the calls for help are so urgent, that it
is painful for us, in the name of the church, to be constantly saying
"No!"

OUR RECEIPTS for the past six months (ending March 31) are as follows:

Church contributions                       