The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gate to Cæsar, by William C. Collar

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Gate to Cæsar

Author: William C. Collar

Release Date: August 9, 2009 [EBook #29645]

Language: Latin

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GATE TO CÆSAR ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Ted Garvin and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net





[This e-text includes characters that require UTF-8 (Unicode) file
encoding:

  āēīōū ĀĒĪŌŪ  [vowels with macron or “long” mark]
  ĕĭŏ  [vowels with breve or “short” mark: very rare]

If any of these characters do not display properly--in particular, if
the diacritic does not appear directly above the letter--or if the
apostrophes and quotation marks in this paragraph appear as garbage,
make sure your text reader’s “character set” or “file encoding” is set
to Unicode (UTF-8). You may also need to change the default font. As a
last resort, use the Latin-1 version of the file instead.

As explained in the editor’s Introductory Note, readings are given
in two forms. For this e-text, line breaks and numbers were retained
in the simplified version for use with the Notes. In the unchanged
version, each chapter is a single paragraph, with the page-and-line
range given in brackets at the end of each chapter.

To reduce visual clutter, some _italic_ and +boldface+ markup has been
simplified or omitted.]




  The

  GATE TO CÆSAR

  by

  WILLIAM C. COLLAR, A.M.

  Head Master Roxbury Latin School

  BOSTON, U.S.A.
  GINN & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS
  1895


  Copyright, 1891,
  By William C. Collar.
  All Rights Reserved.


  Typography by J. S. Cushing & Co., Boston, U.S.A.
  Presswork by Ginn & Co., Boston, U.S.A.




PREFACE.


The recent discovery of a work of Aristotle has interested and delighted
the whole learned world; but one may venture to say that if, instead,
a book had been found written in the best period of the Latin language
for the amusement or instruction of youth, by some Roman De Foe, or
Goldsmith, or Lamb, or Burnett, there would be ten times the reason
for rejoicing. Unhappily there is no likelihood that we shall ever
congratulate ourselves on such a “find,” for probably no such work ever
existed. What a misfortune that it did not occur to Cicero to divert
himself in some leisure hour by writing a story for Roman youth!
Millions of boys and girls in these later ages would have had good
reason to bless his name. Cæsar could have done it; but to him, too, the
gods denied such an inspiration, and we must suffer for it. Seeing that
he had composed a treatise on Latin Grammar, one almost wonders that a
mind so original and fertile should not have conceived the idea of
adapting his Gallic War, or some part of it, to the powers and
comprehension of youth. What measureless gratitude would he not have won
from unborn generations of schoolmasters, who have now to struggle
desperately and often unavailingly to make clear to their pupils the
meaning of his intricate periods, and untwist the strands of his knotty
syntax!

Cæsar is a difficult author. Some parts of his Gallic War are as hard,
or nearly as hard, as any prose Latin that has come down to us. Yet it
has somehow strangely enough become the fashion to read that work first
in a Latin course. My own conviction is that for young learners a year’s
reading in easier Latin is not too much before taking up the less
difficult books of the Gallic War. Even then the transition to Cæsar
comes with something of a shock; for the learner is soon and often
brought face to face with sentences that seem to him of most bewildering
intricacy, however they may, as commentators sometimes remark,
beautifully illustrate most important principles of Latin order and
construction. There is a sentence in the second book, by no means the
most difficult one to be found, that extends through eighteen
lines,--that is, something more than half a page,--containing twenty-one
distinct ideas, and having the verb separated from its subject by
ninety-four words.

I know no more disheartening task than that of undertaking to carry a
class unprepared in age and knowledge of the language through Cæsar’s
Gallic War. Yet it is precisely this disheartening task that thousands
of teachers are set to do, or set themselves to do, every year. The
results are often dismal enough. Teachers are blamed, they blame
themselves, they blame their pupils. Pupils may sometimes be stupid,
teachers may lack knowledge of the language and the subject, but the
fault may also lie wholly with the author or with the Latin language
itself; if with the latter, there is no help. Latin, it must be
confessed, is an exceedingly difficult language to learn. All the more
reason then why, in attacking it, every unnecessary obstacle should be
removed. We should make our approaches with caution and skill; we should
take it, if possible, _aperto latere_. We should not begin with a
difficult work; or if, in the dearth of Latin suited to the juvenile
mind, this is deemed unavoidable, common sense suggests the query, _why
not remove provisionally[1] from the text those more intricate parts
that discourage the learner and bar the way of progress_?

    [Footnote 1: It is presumed that the learner will subsequently
    read the complete text.]

Cæsar knew how to write his own language well; but he wrote for men, he
wrote with compression and in haste, and there are passages in his works
that are tough reading for a good Latin scholar. It is the fashion to
praise Cæsar’s lucidity; but brevity and haste are not conducive to
lucidity.

  “Ther nys no werkman, what so ever he be,
  That may bothe werke wel, and hastily.
  This wol be doon at leyser parfitly.”

For my part I confess that I sometimes find him obscure. Moreover, when
I am in doubt as to his meaning and appeal to the commentators, I find
that they generally disagree and sometimes quarrel about the sense.
Therefore to put young learners to reading Cæsar as his text stands,
bristling with difficulties, before they have acquired anything more
than a meagre vocabulary and gained a modicum of insight by some
practice in reading easier Latin, is to set them at a task harder than
that which Pharaoh set the Israelites.

I am of the opinion that, even when a fair working vocabulary has been
acquired through some previous reading, there is no book of the Gallic
War that does not require a certain degree of simplification to bring it
to the level of the powers of young boys and girls. It is this
conviction born of long observation of the vexation of spirit,
discouragement, and waste of time by pupils in wrestling with
difficulties that inevitably floor them, that has prompted me to put my
hand to this work, which, slight as it may seem, has cost me the leisure
of many months. But I shall feel repaid tenfold, if, through this little
book, boys and girls are enabled to read Cæsar with less waste of time,
more easily, with fresher interest, and added sense of power; if, in
other words, it proves in reality what it is in name, a Gate to Cæsar.

A few words will be sufficient to explain the principle on which I have
simplified Cæsar’s text, the amount of excision, and the degree of
change. It would have been a comparatively easy task to simplify the
text by the mere process of omission, never deviating from the
_ipsissima verba_ of the author by so much as the change of a mode or
tense. One could do this and still string together the _disjecta membra_
of the text into something like a connected narrative. But that would be
to preserve the integrity of the words at the expense of everything
else,--inner relation, structure, style, spirit. Or the simplification
might be effected by a virtual rewriting of the text, by amplification
rather than suppression, coupled with changes in the collocation of
words, where the arrangement seemed to obscure the meaning and perplex
the learner.

My purpose and plan differed essentially from both these methods. My aim
has been, first, to keep the narrative intact; second, to retain as much
of the text as was consistent with the effort to disburden it of its
greater difficulties; third, to make the fewest practicable changes in
what was retained, save the modification of some verb forms, and the
occasional rendering of indirect into direct discourse; fourth, very
rarely to change the position of a word; finally, never to insert a
word, except now and then to supply a form plainly understood, or to
introduce some connective, like _et_, _tum_, _itaque_, _autem_, _ergo_,
_postremo_.

As to the amount of excision, I find that I have omitted almost exactly
one-fifth of Cæsar’s text.

If the beginner in Cæsar reads the simplified text and concurrently
turns the Exercises into Latin, laying firm hold of the grammatical
principles selected for illustration, I believe he will find the
remaining difficulties of the original text not beyond his scope.
I should even hope that he would then read with something of the joy of
conscious power. If the reading of the texts and the writing of the
Exercises should require more time than is usually spent on the second
book of Cæsar, which, however, I doubt, I believe subsequent progress
would still be rapid and satisfactory enough to amount to a net gain and
saving of time.

It has seemed best to mark long vowels, except the vowels of final
syllables and of monosyllables, the rules for which can be readily
learned. I have, however, marked a few monosyllables, as a constant
reminder to teachers who find their old pronunciation clinging to
certain words. We used to say _hĭs_, _sĭc_, _nŏn_, _quĭn_, _hŏc_. These
words, therefore, I have marked. On the other hand, one is in no danger
of saying _dĕ_, _hĭ_, _sĭ_, _prŏ_, for old habit would not mislead.

I take pleasure in acknowledging my obligations to Mr. Alfred G. Rolfe
for several useful criticisms, and to Miss Caroline Ober Stone for
valuable corrections and for carefully reading the proof-sheets as far
as the vocabularies. To Mr. Clarence W. Gleason I am specially indebted.
But for his timely and generous aid in preparing both vocabularies, the
publication of this book must have been very considerably delayed.

WILLIAM C. COLLAR.

SEACONNET, July 25, 1891.




CONTENTS.


                                        PAGE
  Introductory Note                        x
  Simplified Text                       1-22
  Complete Text                        23-41
  Notes on Both Texts                  43-71
  Exercises on Simplified Text         73-88
  Vocabulary                          89-123
  Etymological Vocabulary            125-141




NOTE ON THE USE OF THE BOOK.


The Simplified Text and the Exercises based upon it are of the first
importance. The _viva voce_ translation of the Exercises, followed by
the writing of them, will illustrate and help to implant in the memory
the most important principles of syntax met with in the text. Let the
teacher insist upon thorough work here, and he may safely omit other
syntactical instruction.

But little power of reading Latin can be gained without making the
acquisition of a working vocabulary a distinct object. The Latin
synonyms and the Etymological Vocabulary may be made useful agents to
that end. If the words added to each chapter are read aloud, reviewed,
and compared where backward references are made, the learner will
acquire a useful stock of synonyms easily, naturally, and with small
expenditure of time.

It is often easier to retain in mind a number of words, grouped
according to some principle of similarity or contrast, than a single
word with nothing to hook it to the memory. For this reason it is
recommended that the Etymological Vocabulary be often pressed into the
service. Suppose, for example, the word _conspectus_ occurs in the
lesson. If the teacher will turn to page 138 and have the ten words read
out under the root SPEC, he will multiply several times the chances that
this particular word will be remembered on its next occurrence. He will
have done much more. He will have increased the chances that nine other
words will be lodged in the memory; and to each one a fresh interest
will be added by its being seen in relation, not as an isolated, and
therefore barren, fact.

The first vocabulary may be used for comparing in the text the different
meanings and uses of the same word. It is through such comparisons that
one gets at the heart and spirit of the language, while cultivating at
the same time a mental habit of great value.

Having read the Simplified Text, the learner should be well equipped for
wrestling with the difficulties that remain in the unchanged text, for
he is already familiar with the thought and the language. Comparison of
the two texts by the teacher, so far as time permits, may now be made to
illustrate important principles, as of indirect discourse, which are
here and there discussed in the notes.




CÆSAR’S GALLIC WAR


BOOK II.

B.C. 57; A.U.C. 697.


THE BELGIAN LEAGUE DEFEATED.

SIMPLIFIED TEXT.


_The Belgæ form a league against the Romans._

  1. Cum esset Caesar in citeriōre Gallia, crēbri ad eum
  rūmōres adferēbantur. Litteris item Labiēni certior fīēbat
  omnes Belgas contra populum Rōmānum coniūrāre
  obsidēsque inter se dare. Coniūrandi hae erant causae:
  prīmum verēbantur ne ad se exercitus noster addūcerētur;         5
  deinde ab nōnnūllis Gallis sollicitābantur. Hi Germānos
  diūtius in Gallia versāri nōluerant et populi Rōmāni
  exercitum hiemāre atque inveterāscere in Gallia moleste
  ferēbant. Nōnnūlli mōbilitāte et levitāte animi novis
  imperiis studēbant. Ab nōnnūllis etiam sollicitābantur,         10
  quod in Gallia a potentiōribus atque iis qui ad condūcendos
  homines facultātes habēbant, vulgo rēgna occupābantur;
  qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro cōnsequi
  poterant.

    +crēber+, _frequens_.
    +vereor+, _timeo_.
    +deinde+, _tum_.
    +versor+: _maneo_, _sum_.
    +moleste+, _graviter_.
    +studeo+, _cupio_.


_Cæsar levies two legions and marches against them._

  2. Hīs nūntiis litterīsque commōtus est Caesar. Duas
  legiōnes in citeriōre Gallia novas cōnscrīpsit. In interiōrem
  Galliam qui hās legiōnes dēdūceret Q. Pedium
  lēgātum mīsit. Ipse, cum prīmum pābuli cōpia esse
  inciperet, ad exercitum vēnit. Senones fīnitimi Belgis           5
  erant. Ea quae apud Belgas geruntur cōgnōscunt Caesaremque
  de hīs rēbus certiōrem faciunt. Hi cōnstanter
  omnes nūntiāvērunt manus cōgi, exercitum in ūnum locum
  condūci. Tum vēro nōn dubitāvit Caesar quīn ad eos
  proficīscerētur. Itaque castra movet diēbusque circiter         10
  quīndecim ad fīnes Belgārum pervenit.

    +nūntius+, _rūmor_.
    +fīnitimus+: _vīcīnus_, _propīnquus_.
    +gero+: _ago_, _facio_.
    +cōgo+, _conligo_.
    +condūco+, _conligo_.
    +pervenio+, _accēdo_.


_The Remi at once show the white feather._

  3. Eo de imprōvīso celeriterque vēnit Caesar. Rēmi
  ad eum lēgātos Iccium et Andocumborium mīsērunt, qui
  dīxērunt se omnia in fidem atque in potestātem populi
  Rōmāni permittere. “Rēmi neque cum Belgis reliquis
  cōnsēnsērunt neque contra populum Rōmānum coniūrāvērunt.         5
  Parāti sunt obsides dare et Caesaris imperāta
  facere et eum oppidis recipere et frūmento cēterīsque rēbus
  iuvāre. Reliqui omnes Belgae in armis sunt. Germāni,
  qui cis Rhēnum incolunt, sēse cum hīs coniūnxērunt.
  Tantus est eōrum omnium furor ut ne Suessiōnes quidem           10
  dēterrēre possint Rēmi. Suessiōnes frātres Rēmōrum cōnsanguineīque
  sunt eōdemque iūre et īsdem lēgibus ūtuntur.
  Ūnum imperium ūnumque magistrātum cum iis habent.”

    +de imprōvīso+: _subito_, _repente_.
    +permitto+, _dēdo_.
    +cōnsentio+: _coniūro_, _me coniungo_.
    +dēterreo+, _dissuādeo_.


_Cæsar learns the number of the enemy’s forces._

  4. Cum ab hīs quaereret quae cīvitātes quantaeque in
  armis essent et quid in bello possent, sīc reperiēbat:
  plērīque Belgae sunt orti ab Germānis Rhēnumque antīquitus
  trāducti ibi cōnsēdērunt, Gallōsque qui ea loca
  incolēbant expulērunt. Sōli fuērunt qui Teutonos Cimbrōsque      5
  intra fīnes suos ingredi prohibuērunt. Qua ex
  re fīēbat ut māgnam sibi auctōritātem māgnōsque spīritus
  in re mīlitāri sūmerent. De numero eōrum omnia se
  habēre explōrāta Rēmi dīcēbant. Quantam quisque multitūdinem
  in commūni Belgārum concilio ad id bellum pollicitus            10
  esset cōgnōverant. Plūrimum inter eos Bellovaci
  et virtūte et auctōritāte et hominum numero valēbant.
  Hi poterant cōnficere armāta mīlia centum; polliciti sunt
  ex eo numero ēlēcta sexāginta tōtīusque belli imperium
  sibi postulābant. Suessiōnes Rēmōrum erant fīnitimi;            15
  lātissimos ferācissimōsque agros possidēbant. Apud eos
  fuit rēx nostra etiam memoria Divitiacus, tōtīus Galliae
  potentissimus, qui cum māgnae partis hārum regiōnum
  tum etiam Britanniae imperium obtinuit. Nunc erat rēx
  Galba; ad hunc propter iūstitiam prūdentiamque suam             20
  belli summa dēlāta est.

    +quaero+, _interrogo_.
    +reperio+, _cōgnōsco_.
    +orior+, _nāscor_.
    +cōnsīdo+, _me colloco_.
    +spīritus+: _adrogantia_, _animi_.
    +explōro+, _cōgnōsco_.
    +valeo+, _possum_.
    +cōnficio+, _comparo_.
    +ferax+, _fertilis_.
    +summa+: _cūra_, _imperium_.


_He takes hostages from the Remi and crosses the Axona._

  5. Caesar omnem senātum ad se convenīre prīncipumque
  līberos obsides ad se addūci iūssit. Quae omnia ab hīs
  dīligenter ad diem facta sunt. Ipse Divitiacum Aeduum
  māgno opere cohortātus est. Rei pūblicae interest manus
  hostium distinēri, ne cum tanta multitūdine ūno tempore          5
  cōnflīgendum sit. Id fieri potest, si suas cōpias Aedui
  in fīnes Bellovacōrum intrōdūxerint et eōrum agros populāri
  coeperint. Hīs mandātis eum ab se dīmittit. Postea
  Caesar omnes Belgārum cōpias in ūnum locum coāctas
  ad se venīre vīdit neque iam longe abesse. Hōc ab iis           10
  quōs mīserat explōrātōribus et ab Rēmis cōgnōvit. Tum
  flūmen Axonam exercitum trādūcere mātūrāvit atque ibi
  castra posuit. Quae res latus ūnum castrōrum rīpis flūminis
  mūniēbat et post eum quae essent tūta ab hostibus
  reddēbat. Commeātus etiam ab Rēmis reliquīsque cīvitātibus      15
  sine perīculo portāri poterant. In eo flūmine pōns
  erat. Ibi praesidium pōnit et in altera parte flūminis
  Q. Titurium Sabīnum lēgātum cum sex cohortibus relīquit;
  castra in altitūdinem pedum XII vāllo fossāque
  duodēvīginti pedum mūnīre iubet.                                20

    +iubeo+, _impero_.
    +māgno opere+, _vehementer_.
    +interest+, _pertinet_.
    +distineo+, _dīvido_.
    +cōnflīgo+: _pūgno_, _dīmico_.
    +populor+, _vāsto_.
    +cōgo+, _condūco_, 2.
    +cōgnōsco+, _reperio_, 4.
    +mātūro+, _propero_.
    +commeātus+, _cibus_.


_How the Belgæ lay siege to a town._

  6. Ab hīs castris oppidum Rēmōrum nōmine Bibrax
  aberat mīlia passuum octo. Id ex itinere māgno impetu
  Belgae oppūgnāre coepērunt. Aegre eo die sustentātum
  est. Gallōrum eadem atque Belgārum oppūgnātio est
  haec. Circumiecta multitūdine hominum tōtis moenibus             5
  undique in mūrum lapides iaciunt. Ubi mūrus dēfēnsōribus
  nūdātus est, testūdine facta portas succēdunt mūrumque
  subruunt. Quod tum facile fīēbat. Nam cum tanta
  multitūdo lapides āc tēla cōnicerent, in mūro cōnsistendi
  potestas erat nūlli. Postrēmo fīnem oppūgnandi nox              10
  fēcit. Tum Iccius Rēmus, qui oppido praefuerat, nūntium
  ad Caesarem mittit: nisi subsidium sibi submittātur,
  sēse diūtius sustinēre nōn posse.

    +tōtus+, _omnis_.
    +undique+, _ex omni parte_.
    +ubi+, _cum_.
    +nūdo+, _prīvo_.
    +succēdo+: _accēdo_, _subeo_.
    +subruo+, _suffodio_.
    +cōnsisto+, _sto_.
    +praesum+, _praefectus sum_.
    +subsidium+, _auxilium_.
    +sustineo+, _sustento_.


_They abandon the siege and turn against Cæsar._

  7. Eo de media nocte Caesar Numidas et Crētas sagittārios
  et funditōres Baleāres subsidio oppidānis mittit;
  quōrum adventu hostibus spes potiundi oppidi discessit.
  Itaque paulisper apud oppidum morāti agrōsque Rēmōrum
  dēpopulāti ad castra Caesaris omnibus cōpiis contendērunt        5
  et ab mīlibus passuum minus duōbus castra
  posuērunt; quae castra, ut fūmo atque īgnibus sīgnificābātur,
  amplius mīlibus passuum octo in lātitūdinem
  patēbant.

    +subsidium+, _auxilium_, 6.
    +potior+, _occupo_.
    +discēdo+, _abeo_.
    +paulisper+, _nōn diu_.
    +moror+, _cunctor_.
    +dēpopulor+, _vāsto_.
    +contendo+, _mātūro_, 5.
    +pateo+, _pertineo_.


_Cæsar awaits the attack of the enemy._

  8. Caesar prīmo propter multitūdinem hostium et
  propter eximiam opīniōnem virtūtis proelio supersedēre
  statuit; cotīdie tamen quid hostis virtūte posset et quid
  nostri audērent perīclitābātur. Locus erat pro castris ad
  aciem īnstruendam nātūra opportūnus atque idōneus. Is            5
  autem collis, ubi castra posita erant, paululum ex plānitie
  ēditus tantum adversus in lātitūdinem patēbat quantum
  loci acies īnstrūcta occupāre poterat. Atque ex utrāque
  parte lateris dēiectus habēbat, et in frōntem lēniter fastīgātus
  paulātim ad plānitiem redībat. Ab utrōque latere                10
  ēius collis trānsversam fossam obdūxit circiter passuum
  quadringentōrum et ad extrēmas fossas castella cōnstituit
  ibique tormenta conlocāvit, ne hostes ab lateribus pūgnantes
  suos circumvenīre possent. Hōc facto duābus
  legiōnibus quās proxime cōnscrīpserat in castris relīctis,      15
  reliquas sex legiōnes pro castris in acie cōnstituit. Hostes
  item suas cōpias ex castris ēductas īnstrūxerant.

    +eximius+: _excellens_, _ēgregius_.
    +opīnio+, _fāma_.
    +supersedeo+, _abstineo_.
    +perīclitor+: _tento_, _experior_.
    +idōneus+: _aptus_, _commodus_.
    +dēiectus+, _dēclīvitas_.
    +fastīgātus+, _adclīvis_.
    +conloco+, _pōno_.


_Finally the enemy make a dash to cross the Axona._

  9. Palus erat nōn māgna inter nostrum atque hostium
  exercitum. Hanc si nostri trānsīrent hostes exspectābant.
  Interim proelio equestri inter duas acies contendēbātur.
  Ubi neutri trānseundae ēius palūdis initium
  faciunt, secundiōre equitum proelio nostris Caesar suos          5
  in castra redūxit. Hostes prōtinus ex eo loco ad flūmen
  Axonam contendērunt, quod esse post nostra castra
  dēmōnstrātum est. Partem suārum cōpiārum trādūcere
  cōnāti sunt, ut castellum cui praeerat Q. Titurius lēgātus
  expūgnārent pontemque interscinderent; si minus potuissent,     10
  ut agros Rēmōrum populārentur commeātūque
  nostros prohibērent.

    +initium+, _prīncipium_.
    +secundus+, _prōsperus_.
    +prōtinus+: _statim_, _extemplo_, _repente_, _subito_.
    +contendo+, _mātūro_, 7.
    +praesum+, _praefectus sum_, 6.
    +interscindo+, _abrumpo_.
    +commeātus+, _cibus_, 5.


_A battle follows, the Belgæ are defeated and disperse._

  10. Caesar omnem equitātum et levis armātūrae Numidas,
  funditōres sagittāriōsque pontem trādūcit atque
  ad eos contendit. Ācriter in eo loco pūgnātum est. Hostes
  impedītos nostri in flūmine adgressi māgnum eōrum
  numerum occīdērunt. Prīmos qui trānsierant equitātu              5
  circumventos interfēcērunt. Hostes, ubi de expūgnando
  oppido spem se fefellisse intellēxērunt neque nostros in
  locum inīquiōrem prōgredi vīdērunt atque ipsos res frūmentāria
  dēficere coepit, concilium convocāvērunt. Cōnstituērunt
  optimum esse domum suam quemque reverti.                        10
  Cōnstituērunt etiam ut quōrum in fīnes prīmum Rōmāni
  exercitum intrōdūxissent ad eos dēfendendos undique
  convenīrent. Quod eo cōnsilio fēcērunt, ut potius in suis
  quam in aliēnis fīnibus dēcertārent. Ad eam sententiam
  haec ratio eos dēdūxit, quod Divitiacum atque Aeduos            15
  fīnibus Bellovacōrum adpropīnquāre cōgnōverant. Hīs
  persuādēri ut diūtius morārentur nōn poterat.

    +armātūra+, _arma_.
    +ācriter+, _vehementer_.
    +adgredior+, _adorior_.
    +occīdo+, _concīdo_.
    +prōgredior+: _prōcēdo_, _prōdeo_.
    +cōnstituo+, _statuo_.
    +revertor+, _redeo_.
    +dēcerto+: _pūgno_, _dīmico_.
    +sententia+, _cōnsilium_.
    +moror+, _cunctor_, 7.


_They are pursued with awful slaughter._

  11. Ea re cōnstitūta, secunda vigilia māgno cum strepitu
  āc tumultu castris ēgressi, nūllo certo ōrdine neque
  imperio, fēcērunt ut cōnsimilis fugae profectio vidērētur.
  Hāc re statim Caesar per speculātōres cōgnita īnsidias
  veritus exercitum equitātumque castris continuit. Prīma          5
  lūce omnem equitātum qui novissimum āgmen morārētur
  praemīsit. T. Labiēnum lēgātum cum legiōnibus tribus
  subsequi iūssit. Hi novissimos adorti et multa mīlia
  passuum prōsecūti māgnam multitūdinem eōrum fugientium
  concīdērunt. Ii ad quos ventum erat cōnsistēbant                10
  fortiterque impetum nostrōrum sustinēbant; sed priōres,
  quod abesse a perīculo vidēbantur, exaudīto clāmōre perturbātis
  ōrdinibus omnes in fuga sibi praesidium pōnēbant.
  Ita sine ūllo perīculo māgnam eōrum multitūdinem
  nostri interfēcērunt sub occāsumque sōlis dēstitērunt sēque     15
  in castra, ut erat imperātum, recēpērunt.

    +cōnstituo+, _statuo_, 10.
    +strepitus+: _clāmor_, _fremitus_.
    +cōnsimilis+, _persimilis_.
    +vereor+, _timeo_, 1.
    +moror+, _cunctor_, 7.
    +subsequor+: _prōsequor_, _īnsequor_.
    +adorior+, _adgredior_, 10.
    +concīdo+, _occīdo_, 10.
    +cōnsisto+, _sto_, 6.
    +sustineo+, _sustento_, 6.


_A forced march and attack on Noviodunum. The town surrenders._

  12. Postrīdie ēius diēi Caesar in fīnes Suessiōnum
  exercitum dūxit et māgno itinere cōnfecto ad oppidum
  Noviodūnum contendit. Id ex itinere oppūgnāre cōnātus,
  quod vacuum ab dēfēnsōribus esse audiēbat, expūgnāre
  nōn potuit. Interim omnis ex fuga Suessiōnum multitūdo           5
  in oppidum proxima nocte convēnit. Celeriter vīneis
  ad oppidum āctis, aggere iacto turribusque cōnstitūtis,
  māgnitūdine operum et celeritāte Rōmānōrum permōti
  sunt Suessiōnes. Itaque lēgātos ad Caesarem de dēditiōne
  mittunt et petentibus Rēmis ut cōnservārentur impetrant.        10
  petrant.

    +cōnficio+, _perficio_.
    +contendo+, _propero_.
    +vacuus+: _carens_, _nūdus_.
    +interim+, _interea_.
    +ago+: _pello_, _dūco_, _traho_.
    +permoveo+, _commoveo_.
    +dēditio+, _trāditio_.
    +impetro+, _cōnsequor_.


_The Bellovaci also submit at Cæsar’s approach._

  13. Caesar obsidibus acceptis armīsque omnibus ex
  oppido trāditis in dēditiōnem Suessiōnes accēpit exercitumque
  in Bellovacos dūxit. Qui cum se suaque omnia
  in oppidum Bratuspantium contulissent, atque ab eo
  oppido Caesar cum exercitu circiter mīlia passuum quīnque        5
  abesset, omnes māiōres nātu ex oppido ēgressi manus
  ad Caesarem tendere et vōce sīgnificāre coepērunt sēse in
  ēius fidem āc potestātem venīre. Item, cum ad oppidum
  accessisset, pueri mulierēsque ex mūro passis manibus
  suo mōre pācem ab Rōmānis petiērunt.                            10

    +trādo+: _do_, _dēdo_.
    +me cōnfero+: _me recipio_, _eo_.
    +ēgredior+, _exeo_.
    +coepi+, _incēpi_.
    +pueri+, _līberi_.
    +pando+, _tendo_.
    +mōs+, _cōnsuētūdo_.
    +peto+, _ōro_.


_Divitiacus pleads earnestly for the Bellovaci._

  14. Pro hīs Divitiacus facit verba: “Bellovaci omni
  tempore in fide atque amīcitia cīvitātis Aeduae fuērunt:
  impulsi a suis prīncipibus, qui dīcēbant Aeduos omnes
  indīgnitātes contumēliāsque perferre, ab Aeduis dēfēcērunt
  et populo Rōmāno bellum intulērunt. Ii qui ēius                  5
  cōnsili prīncipes fuērunt in Britanniam profūgērunt.
  Petunt nōn sōlum Bellovaci sed etiam pro hīs Aedui ut
  tua clēmentia āc mānsuētūdine in eos ūtāris. Quod si
  fēceris, Aeduōrum auctōritātem apud omnes Belgas amplificābis,
  quōrum auxiliis atque opibus, si qua bella                      10
  incidunt, sustentāre cōnsuērunt.”

    +impello+: _incito_, _indūco_.
    +contumēlia+, _iniūria_.
    +dēficio+: _dēsero_.
    +mānsuētūdo+, _lēnitas_.
    +auctōritas+, _grātia_.
    +amplifico+, _augeo_.
    +sustento+, _sustineo_, 6.
    +cōnsuēsco+, _soleo_.


_The temperance, courage, and patriotism of the Nervii._

  15. Caesar honōris Divitiaci atque Aeduōrum causa
  sēse eos in fidem receptūrum et cōnservātūrum dīxit;
  quod erat cīvitas māgna inter Belgas auctōritāte, sexcentos
  obsides poposcit. Hīs trāditis omnibusque armis
  ex oppido conlātis, ab eo loco in fīnes Ambiānōrum pervēnit.     5
  Eōrum fīnes Nervii attingēbant; quōrum de
  nātūra mōribusque Caesar cum quaereret, sīc reperiēbat:
  Nūllus aditus erat ad eos mercātōribus; nihil patiēbantur
  vīni reliquārumque rērum īnferri, quod iis rēbus
  relanguēscere animos et remitti virtūtem exīstimābant:          10
  erant homines feri māgnaeque virtūtis; increpitābant
  atque incūsābant reliquos Belgas, qui se populo Rōmāno
  dēdidissent.

    +auctōritas+, _grātia_, 14.
    +posco+, _impero_.
    +cōnfero+, _cōgo_, 2.
    +attingo+, _contingo_.
    +aditus+, _accessus_.
    +patior+, _sino_.
    +relanguēsco+, _effēminor_.
    +remitto+, _minuo_.
    +incūso+, _accūso_.
    +dēdo+, _permitto_.


_Encamped on the Sabis the Nervii await the coming of Cæsar._

  16. Cum per eōrum fīnes trīduum iter fēcisset, inveniēbat
  ex captīvis Sabim flūmen ab castris suis nōn
  amplius mīlia passuum x abesse. Trāns id flūmen omnes
  Nervii cōnsēderant adventumque ibi Rōmānōrum exspectābant.
  Exspectābantur etiam ab hīs Aduātucōrum cōpiae                   5
  atque erant in itinere. Mulieres quīque per aetātem ad
  pūgnam inūtiles vidērentur in eum locum coniēcerant,
  quo propter palūdes exercitui aditus nōn esset.

    +cōnsīdo+, _me colloco_, 4.
    +cōnicio+, _dēpōno_.
    +aditus+, 15.


_They plan to attack Cæsar’s advance guard._

  17. Hīs rēbus cōgnitis explōrātōres centuriōnēsque
  praemittit qui locum idōneum castris dēligant. Cum ex
  dēditīciis Belgis reliquīsque Gallis complūres Caesarem
  secūti ūna iter facerent, quīdam ex hīs nocte ad Nervios
  pervēnērunt. Hīs dēmōnstrārunt inter singulas legiōnes           5
  impedīmentōrum māgnum numerum intercēdere, neque
  esse quicquam negōti, cum prīma legio in castra vēnisset,
  hanc sub sarcinis adorīri; qua pulsa futūrum ut reliquae
  legiōnes contra cōnsistere nōn audērent. Nervii autem
  antīquitus, quo facilius fīnitimōrum equitātum impedīrent,      10
  teneris arboribus incīsis atque īnflexis, crēbrīsque
  in lātitūdinem rāmis ēnātis, et rubis sentibusque interiectis,
  effēcerant ut īnstar mūri hae saepes mūnīmenta
  praebērent, quo nōn modo nōn intrāri sed ne perspici
  quidem posset. Hīs rēbus cum iter āgminis nostri impedīrētur,   15
  nōn omittendum sibi cōnsilium Nervii exīstimāvērunt.

    +idōneus+: _aptus_, _commodus_, 8.
    +dēligo+, _ēligo_.
    +intercēdo+, _intervenio_.
    +sarcinae+: _impedīmenta_, _onera_.
    +adorior+, _adgredior_, 11.
    +cōnsisto+, _sto_, 6.
    +incīdo+, _accīdo_.
    +īnstar+: _fōrma_, _similitūdo_.
    +omitto+, _neglego_.
    +exīstimo+, _puto_.


_The Roman camping-ground and the position of the enemy._

  18. Loci nātūra erat haec, quem locum nostri castris
  dēlēgerant. Collis ab summo acquāliter dēclīvis ad flūmen
  Sabim, quod supra nōmināvimus, vergēbat. Ab eo flūmine
  pari adclīvitāte collis nāscēbātur, ab superiōre parte
  silvestris ut nōn facile intrōrsus perspici posset. Intra        5
  eas silvas hostes in occulto sēse continēbant; in aperto
  loco secundum flūmen paucae statiōnes equitum vidēbantur.
  Flūminis erat altitūdo pedum circiter trium.

    +summum+, _culmen_.
    +dēclīvis+, _prōclīvis_.
    +vergo+, _pertineo_.
    +nāscor+, _orior_, 4.
    +intrōrsus+, _intra_.
    +in occulto+, _abditus_.
    +statio+, _custōdia_.
    +circiter+, _ad_.


_The plan of attack is skilfully carried out by the Nervii._

  19. Caesar equitātu praemīsso subsequēbātur omnibus
  cōpiis. Sed quod ad hostes adpropīnquābat, cōnsuētūdine
  sua sex legiōnes expedītas dūcēbat; post eas
  tōtīus exercitus impedīmenta conlocārat; inde duae legiōnes,
  quae proxime cōnscrīptae erant, tōtum āgmen claudēbant           5
  praesidiōque impedīmentis erant. Equites nostri,
  cum funditōribus sagittāriīsque flūmen trānsgressi, cum
  hostium equitātu proelium commīsērunt. Illi se identidem
  in silvas ad suos recipiēbant āc rūrsus ex silva in
  nostros impetum faciēbant. Interim legiōnes sex, quae           10
  prīmae vēnerant, opere dīmēnso castra mūnīre coepērunt.
  Ubi prīma impedīmenta nostri exercitus ab iis qui in
  silvis abditi latēbant vīsa sunt, subito omnibus cōpiis
  prōvolāvērunt impetumque in nostros equites fēcērunt.
  Hīs facile pulsis āc prōturbātis, incrēdibili celeritāte ad     15
  flūmen dēcucurrērunt, ut paene ūno tempore ad silvas et
  in flūmine et iam in manibus nostris hostes vidērentur.
  Eādem autem celeritāte adverso colle ad nostra castra
  atque eos qui in opere occupāti erant contendērunt.

    +subsequor+, _prōsequor_, 11.
    +conloco+, _pōno_, 8.
    +trānsgredior+, _trānseo_.
    +identidem+, _iterum atque iterum_.
    +rūrsus+, _iterum_.
    +interim+, _interea_, 12.
    +dīmētior+, _mētior_.
    +lateo+, _me cēlo_.
    +prōvolo+, _prōruo_.
    +prōturbo+, _fugo_.
    +paene+, _fere_.
    +contendo+, _propero_, 7.


_But the soldiers and lieutenants know what to do._

  20. Caesari omnia ūno tempore erant agenda: vēxillum
  prōpōnendum, sīgnum tuba dandum, ab opere revocandi
  mīlites, acies īnstruenda, mīlites cohortandi, sīgnum dandum.
  Quārum rērum māgnam partem temporis brevitas
  et successus hostium impediēbat. Sed erat subsidio               5
  scientia atque ūsus mīlitum, quod superiōribus proeliis
  exercitāti, nōn minus commode ipsi sibi praescrībere
  quam ab aliis docēri poterant. Praeterea ab opere singulīsque
  legiōnibus singulos lēgātos Caesar discēdere
  vetuerat. Hi propter propīnquitātem et celeritātem              10
  hostium nihil iam Caesaris imperium exspectābant, sed
  per se quae vidēbantur administrābant.

    +prōpōno+, _ostendo_.
    +successus+, _accessus_, 15.
    +subsidium+, _auxilium_, 6.
    +ūsus+, _experientia_.
    +exercitātus+, _perītus_.
    +commode+: _apte_, _bene_.
    +praescrībo+, _praecipio_.
    +veto+, _prohibeo_.
    +propīnquitas+, _vīcīnitas_.
    +administro+: _prōvideo_, _ago_.


_Fighting begins before the soldiers can arm themselves._

  21. Caesar necessāriis rēbus imperātis ad cohortandos
  mīlites dēcucurrit et ad legiōnem decimam dēvēnit.
  Mīlites nōn longiōre ōrātiōne cohortātus quam uti suae
  prīstinae virtūtis memoriam retinērent neu perturbārentur
  animo hostiumque impetum fortiter sustinērent,                   5
  quod nōn longe hostes aberant, proeli committendi sīgnum
  dedit. Atque in alteram partem item cohortandi
  causa profectus pūgnantibus occurrit. Temporis tanta
  fuit exiguitas hostiumque tam parātus ad dīmicandum
  animus, ut nōn modo ad īnsīgnia adcommodanda, sed               10
  etiam ad galeas induendas scūtīsque tegimenta dētrūdenda
  tempus dēfuerit. Quam in partem quisque ab opere cāsu
  dēvēnit quaeque prīma sīgna cōnspēxit, ad haec cōnstitit,
  ne in quaerendis suis pūgnandi tempus dīmitteret.

    +dēvenio+, _pervenio_.
    +prīstinus+: _vetus_, _antīquus_.
    +perturbo+, _commoveo_, 12.
    +sustineo+, _sustento_, 6.
    +occurro+, _incĭdo_.
    +exiguitas+, _brevitas_.
    +adcommodo+, _apto_.
    +induo+, _indūco_.
    +dētrūdo+, _dētraho_.
    +cāsu+, _fōrte_.
    +cōnspicio+, _cōnspicor_.
    +dīmitto+, _āmitto_.


_All is confusion in the battle; the commander can do little._

  22. Īnstrūcto exercitu magis ut loci nātūra dēiectusque
  collis et necessitas temporis quam ut rei mīlitāris
  ratio atque ōrdo postulābat, fīēbat ut aliae legiōnes alia
  in parte hostibus resisterent; saepibus autem dēnsissimis,
  ut ante dēmōnstrāvimus, interiectis prōspectus impediēbātur,     5
  ut neque certa subsidia conlocāri, neque ab ūno
  omnia imperia administrāri possent. Itaque in tanta
  rērum inīquitāte, fōrtūnae quoque ēventus varii sequēbantur.

    +dēiectus+, _dēclīvitas_, 8.
    +ratio+, _scientia_.
    +intericio+, _interpōno_.
    +administro+, _ago_, 20.
    +inīquitas+, _varietas_.
    +ēventus+, _cāsus_.


_The battle seems to be going against Cæsar._

  23. Legiōnis nōnae et decimae mīlites, ut in sinistra
  parte acie cōnstiterant, Atrebates cursu āc lassitūdine
  exanimātos vulneribusque cōnfectos celeriter ex loco
  superiōre in flūmen compulērunt. Tum eos trānsīre
  cōnantes īnsecūti, gladiis māgnam partem eōrum                   5
  interfēcērunt. Ipsi trānsīre flūmen nōn dubitāvērunt et in
  locum inīquum prōgressi, hostes redintegrāto proelio in
  fugam cōniēcērunt. Item alia in parte dīversae duae
  legiōnes, ūndecima et octāva, ex loco superiōre in ipsis
  flūminis rīpis proeliābantur. At tōtis fere a frōnte et         10
  ab sinistra parte nūdātis castris, omnes Nervii cōnfertissimo
  āgmine, duce Boduōgnāto, qui summam imperi
  tenēbat, ad eum locum contendērunt; quōrum pars aperto
  latere legiōnes circumvenīre, pars summum castrōrum
  locum petere coepit.                                            15

    +lassitūdo+, _dēfatīgātio_.
    +cōnfectus+, _dēfessus_.
    +compello+, _ago_.
    +redintegro+, _renovo_.
    +cōnfertus+, _dēnsus_.
    +summa+, _cūra_, 4.
    +contendo+, _propero_, 12.
    +peto+, _accurro_.


_It is beginning to look very dark for the Romans._

  24. Eōdem tempore equites nostri levisque armātūrae
  pedites, qui cum iis ūna fuerant, cum se in castra reciperent,
  hostibus occurrēbant āc rūrsus aliam in partem
  fugam petēbant; et cālōnes, praedandi causa ēgressi,
  cum respēxissent et hostes in nostris castris versāri            5
  vīdissent, praecipites fugae sēse mandābant. Simul
  eōrum qui cum impedīmentis veniēbant clāmor fremitusque
  oriēbātur, aliīque aliam in partem perterriti ferēbantur.
  Quibus omnibus rēbus permōti sunt equites
  Trēveri, qui auxili causa ab cīvitāte ad Caesarem mīssi         10
  vēnerant. Ergo cum multitūdine hostium castra complēri,
  legiōnes premi et paene circumventas tenēri, cālōnes,
  equites, funditōres in omnes partes fugere vīdissent,
  dēspērātis nostris rēbus, domum contendērunt atque Rōmānos
  pulsos superātōsque cīvitāti renūntiāvērunt.                    15

    +armātūra+, _arma_, 10.
    +me recipio+, _me cōnfero_, 13.
    +occurro+, _incĭdo_, 21.
    +ēgredior+, _exeo_, 13.
    +versor+, _sum occupātus_, 1.
    +mando+, _commendo_.
    +fremitus+, _strepitus_, 11.
    +orior+, _nāscor_, 4.
    +premo+, _urgeo_.
    +paene+, _fere_, 19.
    +pello+: _fugo_, _prōturbo_, 19.
    +supero+, _vinco_.


_Will Cæsar’s coolness and courage save his army?_

  25. Caesar ab decimae legiōnis cohortātiōne ad dextrum
  cornu profectus suos urgēri et duodecimae legiōnis
  cōnfertos mīlites sibi ipsos ad pūgnam esse impedīmento
  vīdit. Quartae cohortis omnes centuriōnes occīsi sunt
  et, sīgnifero interfecto, sīgnum est āmīssum. Reliquārum         5
  cohortium omnes fere centuriōnes aut vulnerāti aut
  occīsi sunt, in hīs prīmipīlus P. Sextius Baculus, fortissimus
  vir, multis gravibusque vulneribus cōnfectus ut iam
  se sustinēre nōn posset. Hīs rēbus reliquos esse tardiōres
  vīdit Caesar et nōnnullos dēserto proelio excēdere āc tēla      10
  vītāre; hostes autem neque a fronte ex īnferiōre loco
  subeuntes intermittere et ab utrōque latere īnstāare, et
  rem esse in angusto, neque ūllum esse subsidium quod
  submitti posset. Tum vēro scūto ūni mīliti dētracto,
  quod ipse eo sine scūto vēnerat, in prīmam aciem prōcessit,     15
  centuriōnibusque nōminātim appellātis, reliquos
  cohortātus mīlites sīgna īnferre et manipulos laxāre iūssit,
  quo facilius gladiis ūti possent. Cūius adventu spe inlāta
  mīlitibus āc redintegrāto animo paulum hostium impetus
  tardātus est.                                                   20

    +urgeo+, _premo_, 24.
    +cōnfertus+, _dēnsus_, 23.
    +sīgnifer+, _aquilifer_.
    +āmitto+, _dīmitto_, 21.
    +fere+, _paene_, 19.
    +cōnfectus+, _dēfessus_, 23.
    +excēdo+, _exeo_.
    +subeo+, _succēdo_.
    +intermitto+: _dēsino_, _dēsisto_.
    +īnsto+: _urgeo_, _premo_, 24.
    +dētraho+, _rapio_.
    +laxo+, _aperio_.
    +īnfero+ (2): _do_, _adfero_.
    +redintegro+, _renovo_, 23.


_A shifting scene. Pull Romans, pull Nervii!_

  26. Caesar cum septimam legiōnem, quae iūxta cōnstiterat,
  item urgēri ab hoste vīdisset, tribūnos mīlitum
  monuit ut paulātim sēse legiōnes coniungerent. Quo
  facto, cum alius alii subsidium ferret, audācius resistere
  āc fortius pūgnāre coepērunt. Interim mīlites legiōnum           5
  duārum, quae in novissimo āgmine praesidio impedīmentis
  fuerant, proelio nūntiāto cursu incitāto in summo colle
  ab hostibus cōnspiciēbantur; et T. Labiēnus castris hostium
  potītus decimam legiōnem subsidio nostris mīsit.
  Qui cum quo in loco res esset, quantōque in perīculo castra     10
  et legiōnes et imperātor versārētur, cōgnōvissent,
  nihil ad celeritātem sibi reliqui fēcērunt.

    +iūxta+, _prope_.
    +cōnsisto+, 6.
    +urgeo+, 25.
    +paulātim+, _gradātim_.
    +interim+, _interea_, 12.
    +cōnspicio+, _video_.
    +potior+, _occupo_, 7.
    +versor+, _sum_, 1.
    +cōgnōsco+, _reperio_, 4.


_In the fierce wrestle the brave Nervii go under._

  27. Hōrum adventu tanta rērum commūtātio est facta
  ut nostri, etiam qui vulneribus cōnfecti prōcubuissent,
  proelium redintegrārent; equites vēro, ut turpitūdinem
  fugae virtūte dēlērent, omnibus in locis pūgnae se legiōnāriis
  mīlitibus praeferrent. At hostes etiam in extrēma                5
  spe salūtis māximam virtūtem praestitērunt; nam cum
  prīmi eōrum cecidissent, proximi iacentibus comitibus
  īnsistēbant atque ex eōrum corporibus pūgnābant; hīs
  dēiectis et coacervātis cadāveribus, cēteri ut ex tumulo
  tēla in nostros cōniciēbant et pīla intercepta remittēbant:     10
  ut iūdicāri dēbēret nōn nēquīquam tantae virtūtis homines
  ausos esse trānsīre lātissimum flūmen, ascendere altissimas
  rīpas, subīre inīquissimum locum; quae facilia ex
  difficillimis animi māgnitūdo redēgerat.

    +prōcumbo+, _prōcido_.
    +turpitūdo+: _īgnōminia_, _īnfāmia_.
    +dēleo+, _exstinguo_.
    +extrēmus+, _ultimus_.
    +praesto+: _praebeo_, _ostento_.
    +iaceo+, _prōcumbo_.
    +coacervo+: _congero_, _cōgo_.
    +cadāver+, _corpus_.
    +nēquīquam+, _frūstra_.
    +redigo+, _facio_.


_Why slay the poor remnant? Let them live._

  28. Hōc proelio facto et prope ad interneciōnem gente
  āc nōmine Nerviōrum redācto, māiōres nātu, quōs ūna
  cum pueris mulieribusque in palūdes cōniectos dīxerāmus,
  cōnsēnsu omnium qui supererant lēgātos ad Caesarem
  mīsērunt sēque ei dēdidērunt. Postea in commemoranda             5
  cīvitātis calamitāte, ex sexcentis ad tres senātōres, ex
  hominum mīlibus LX vix ad quīngentos qui arma ferre
  possent, sēse redāctos esse dīxērunt. Quōs Caesar ut in
  miseros āc supplices ūsus misericordia vidērētur,               10
  dīligentissime cōnservāvit suīsque fīnibus atque oppidis ūti
  iūssit et fīnitimis imperāvit ut ab iniūria et maleficio se
  suōsque prohibērent.

    +prope+, _paene_, 19.
    +internecio+, _interitus_.
    +redigo+, _redūco_.
    +puerī+, _līberi_, 13.
    +cōnicio+, _dēpōno_, 16.
    +dēdo+, _permitto_, 15.
    +commemoro+, _nārro_.
    +fīnitimus+, _vīcīnus_, 2.


_The Aduatuci prepare to make a desperate resistance._

  29. Aduātuci, qui cum omnibus cōpiis auxilio Nerviis
  veniēbant, hāc pūgna nūntiāta ex itinere domum revertērunt;
  cūnctis oppidis castellīsque dēsertis sua omnia in
  ūnum oppidum ēgregie nātūra mūnītum contulērunt.
  Quod ex omnibus in circuitu partibus altissimas rūpes            5
  dēspectūsque habēbat, sed ūna ex parte lēniter adclīvis
  aditus relinquēbātur; quem locum duplici altissimo mūro
  mūnierant; tum māgni ponderis saxa et praeacūtas trabes
  in mūro conlocābant. Ipsi erant ex Cimbris Teutonīsque
  prōgnāti, qui, cum iter in prōvinciam nostram atque             10
  Ītaliam facerent, custōdiam ex suis āc praesidium sex
  mīlia hominum relīquērunt. Hi post eōrum obitum
  multos annos a fīnitimis exagitāti, cōnsēnsu eōrum omnium
  hunc sibi domicilio locum dēlēgērunt.

    +revertor+, _redeo_, 10.
    +cūnctus+, _omnis_.
    +ēgregie+: _optime_, _eximie_, 8.
    +dēspectus+, _prōspectus_.
    +lēniter+, _paulātim_.
    +aditus+, _accessus_, 15.
    +conloco+, _pōno_, 8.
    +prōgnātus+, _ortus_, 4.
    +obitus+, _interitus_, 28.
    +dēligo+, _ēligo_, 17.


_From their walls they taunt the Romans._

  30. Āc prīmo adventu exercitus nostri crēbras ex
  oppido excursiōnes faciēbant parvulīsque proeliis cum
  nostris contendēbant; postea vāllo pedum XII in circuitu
  XV mīlium crēbrīsque castellis circummūnīti oppido sēse
  continēbant. Ubi vīneis āctis aggere exstrūcto turrim            5
  procul cōnstitui vīdērunt, prīmum inrīdēre ex mūro atque
  increpitāre vōcibus coepērunt, quod tanta māchinātio ab
  tanto spatio īnstruerētur: quibusnam manibus aut quibus
  vīribus praesertim homines tantulae statūrae turrim
  tanti oneris in mūro sēse conlocāre cōnfīderent?                10

    +adventus+, _accessus_, 15.
    +crēber+, _frequens_, 1.
    +excursio+, _ēruptio_.
    +cōnstituo+, _pōno_.
    +inrīdeo+, _dērīdeo_.
    +increpito+, _maledīco_.
    +tantulus+, _parvulus_.
    +onus+, _pondus_.


_But soon they lose confidence and offer to surrender._

  31. Ubi vēro turrim movēri et adpropīnquāre moenibus
  vīdērunt, nova atque inūsitāta specie commōti lēgātos
  ad Caesarem de pāce mīsērunt, qui ad hunc modum locūti
  sunt: Aduātuci nōn exīstimant Rōmānos sine ope dīvīna
  bellum gerere, qui tantae altitūdinis māchinātiōnes tanta        5
  celeritāte prōmovēre possint; itaque se suaque omnia
  eōrum potestāti permittunt. Ūnum petunt: si fōrte
  Caesar pro sua clēmentia āc mānsuētūdine statuerit
  Aduātucos esse cōnservandos, ne eos armis dēspoliet.
  Omnes fere fīnitimi sunt inimīci āc eōrum virtūti invident,     10
  a quibus se dēfendere trāditis armis nōn poterunt. Sibi
  praestet, si in eum cāsum dēdūcantur, quamvis fōrtūnam
  a populo Rōmāno pati, quam ab inimīcis per cruciātum
  interfici.

    +novus+, _mīrus_.
    +inūsitātus+: _īnsolitus_, _novus_.
    +species+, _facies_.
    +modus+, _ratio_.
    +ops+, _auxilium_.
    +permitto+, _dēdo_, 15.
    +peto+, _ōro_, 13.
    +mānsuētūdo+, _lēnitas_, 14.
    +statuo+, _cōnstituo_, 10.
    +fere+, _paene_, 25.
    +cāsus+, _fātum_, 22.
    +dēdūco+, _redigo_, 28.


_They must disarm, but are promised protection._

  32. Ad haec Caesar respondit: “Magis cōnsuētūdine
  mea quam merito vestro cīvitātem cōnservābo, si prius
  quam mūrum aries attigerit, vos dēdideritis: sed dēditiōnis
  nūlla est condicio nisi armis trāditis. Id quod in
  Nerviis fēci faciam fīnitimīsque imperābo ne quam iniūriam       5
  dēditīciis populi Rōmāni īnferant.” Re nūntiāta
  ad suos, quae imperārentur facere dīxērunt. Armōrum
  tanta multitūdo de mūro in fossam quae erat ante oppidum
  iacta est, ut prope summam mūri aggerisque altitūdinem
  acervi eōrum adaequārent, et tamen circiter pars                10
  tertia, ut postea perspectum est, cēlāta atque in oppido
  retenta est. Deinde portis patefactis eo die pāce sunt
  ūsi oppidāni.

    +prius quam+, _ante quam_.
    +dēditio+, _trāditio_, 12.
    +fīnitimus+, _vīcīnus_, 2.
    +īnfero+: _fero_, _facio_.
    +prope+, _paene_, 28.
    +circiter+, _ad_, 19.
    +perspicio+, _intellego_.
    +patefacio+, _aperio_.


_A brave dash for freedom, but a terrible fate._

  33. Sub vesperum Caesar portas claudi mīlitēsque ex
  oppido exīre iūssit. Oppidāni cōnsilio ante inito, ut
  intellēctum est, quod dēditiōne facta nostros praesidia
  dēductūros aut dēnique indīligentius servātūros crēdiderant,
  tertia vigilia, qua minime arduus ad nostras mūnītiōnes          5
  ascēnsus vidēbātur, omnibus cōpiis repentīno ex
  oppido ēruptiōnem fēcērunt. Celeriter, ut ante Caesar
  imperārat, īgnibus sīgnificātiōne facta ex proximis castellis
  eo concursum est. Ibi pūgnātum est ācriter ab
  hostibus in extrēma spe salūtis inīquo loco contra eos          10
  qui ex vāllo turribusque tēla iacerent, cum in ūna virtūte
  omnis spes salūtis cōnsisteret. Occīsis ad hominum
  mīlibus quattuor reliqui in oppidum reiecti sunt. Postrīdie
  ēius diēi refrāctis portis, cum iam dēfenderet nēmo,
  atque intrōmīssis mīlitibus nostris sectiōnem ēius oppidi       15
  ūniversam Caesar vendidit. Ab iis qui ēmerant capitum
  numerus ad eum relātus est mīlium quīnquāginta trium.

    +intellego+, _perspicio_, 32.
    +dēnique+, _saltem_.
    +indīligenter+, _neglegenter_.
    +arduus+, _difficilis_.
    +repentīnus+, _subitus_.
    +ēruptio+, _excursio_, 30.
    +sīgnificātio+, _sīgnum_.
    +inīquus+, _incommodus_.
    +ūniversus+, _tōtus_.
    +refero+, _renūntio_.


_All the maritime nations submit to the Romans._

  34. Eōdem tempore a P. Crasso, quem cum legiōne
  ūna mīserat ad Venetos, Unellos, Osismos, Curiosolitas,
  Esuvios, Aulercos, Rēdones, quae sunt maritimae cīvitātes
  Ōceanumque attingunt, certior factus est omnes eas
  cīvitātes in diciōnem potestātemque populi Rōmāni esse           5
  redāctas.

    +attingo+, _tango_.
    +dicio+, _imperium_.
    +redigo+, _pāco_.


_Gaul lies crushed and bleeding. Rome rejoices and thanks the gods._

  35. Hīs rēbus gestis omni Gallia pācāta, tanta hūius
  belli ad barbaros opīnio perlāta est uti ab iis nātiōnibus
  quae trāns Rhēnum incolerent mitterentur lēgāti ad
  Caesarem, qui se obsides datūras, imperāta factūras pollicērentur.
  Quās lēgātiōnes Caesar, quod in Ītaliam Illyricumque             5
  properābat, inita proxima aestāte ad se reverti
  iūssit. Ipse in Carnūtes, Andes Turonēsque, quae cīvitātes
  propīnquae hīs locis erant ubi bellum gesserat,
  legiōnibus in hībernācula dēductis, in Ītaliam profectus
  est. Ob eāsque res ex litteris Caesaris dies quīndecim          10
  supplicātio dēcrēta est, quod ante id tempus accidit nūlli.

    +pāco+, _redigo_, 34.
    +opīnio+, _fāma_, 8.
    +propero+, _mātūro_, 5.
    +ineo+, _incipio_.
    +propīnquus+: _vīcīnus_, _fīnitimus_, 2.
    +accido+, _contingo_.




C. IULI CAESARIS

DE BELLO GALLICO


_LIBER SECUNDUS._

B.C. 57; A.U.C. 697.

THE BELGIAN LEAGUE DEFEATED.


1. Cum esset Caesar in citeriore Gallia in hibernis, ita uti supra
demonstravimus, crebri ad eum rumores adferebantur, litterisque item
Labieni certior fiebat omnes Belgas, quam tertiam esse Galliae partem
dixeramus, contra populum Romanum coniurare obsidesque inter se dare.
Coniurandi has esse causas: primum quod vererentur ne omni pacata Gallia
ad eos exercitus noster adduceretur; deinde quod ab nonnullis Gallis
sollicitarentur,--partim qui, ut Germanos diutius in Gallia versari
noluerant, ita populi Romani exercitum hiemare atque inveterascere in
Gallia moleste ferebant; partim qui mobilitate et levitate animi novis
imperiis studebant; ab nonnullis etiam, quod in Gallia a potentioribus
atque iis qui ad conducendos homines facultates habebant, vulgo regna
occupabantur, qui minus facile eam rem imperio nostro consequi poterant.
[p. 23 l. 1-16]

2. His nuntiis litterisque commotus Caesar duas legiones in citeriore
Gallia novas conscripsit, et inita aestate in interiorem Galliam qui
deduceret Q. Pedium legatum misit. Ipse, cum primum pabuli copia esse
inciperet, ad exercitum venit. Dat negotium Senonibus reliquisque
Gallis, qui finitimi Belgis erant, uti ea quae apud eos gerantur
cognoscant seque de his rebus certiorem faciant. Hi constanter omnes
nuntiaverunt manus cogi, exercitum in unum locum conduci. Tum vero
dubitandum non existimavit quin ad eos proficisceretur. Re frumentaria
comparata castra movet diebusque circiter quindecim ad fines Belgarum
pervenit. [p. 23 l. 17-20, p. 24 l. 1-8]

3. Eo cum de improviso celeriusque omni opinione venisset, Remi, qui
proximi Galliae ex Belgis sunt, ad eum legatos Iccium et Andocumborium
primos civitatis miserunt qui dicerent: ‘Se suaque omnia in fidem atque
in potestatem populi Romani permittere, neque se cum Belgis reliquis
consensisse neque contra populum Romanum coniurasse, paratosque esse et
obsides dare et imperata facere et oppidis recipere et frumento
ceterisque rebus iuvare; reliquos omnes Belgas in armis esse,
Germanosque qui cis Rhenum incolant sese cum his coniunxisse, tantumque
esse eorum omnium furorem ut ne Suessiones quidem, fratres
consanguineosque suos, qui eodem iure et isdem legibus utantur, unum
imperium unumque magistratum cum ipsis habeant, deterrere potuerint quin
cum his consentirent.’ [p. 24 l. 9-23]

4. Cum ab his quaereret quae civitates quantaeque in armis essent et
quid in bello possent, sic reperiebat: plerosque Belgas esse ortos ab
Germanis Rhenumque antiquitus traductos propter loci fertilitatem ibi
consedisse Gallosque qui ea loca incolerent expulisse, solosque esse qui
patrum nostrorum memoria, omni Gallia vexata, Teutonos Cimbrosque intra
fines suos ingredi prohibuerint; qua ex re fieri uti earum rerum memoria
magnam sibi auctoritatem magnosque spiritus in re militari sumerent. De
numero eorum omni se habere explorata Remi dicebant, proptera quod
propinquitatibus adfinitatibusque coniuncti, quantam quisque
multitudinem in communi Belgarum concilio ad id bellum pollicitus sit
cognoverint. Plurimuni inter eos Bellovacos et virtute et auctoritate et
hominum numero valere: hos posse conficere armata milia centum,
pollicitos ex eo numero electa sexaginta, totiusque belli imperium sibi
postulare. Suessiones suos esse finitimos: latissimos feracissimosque
agros possidere. Apud eos fuisse regem nostra etiam memoria Divitiacum,
totius Galliae potentissimum, qui cum magnae partis harum regionum tum
etiam Britanniae imperium obtinuerit: nunc esse regem Galbam; ad hunc
propter iustitiam prudentiamque suam totius belli summam omnium
voluntate deferri: oppida habere numero XII, polliceri milia armata
quinquaginta; totidem Nervios, qui maxime feri inter ipsos habeantur,
longissimeque absint; quindecim milia Atrebates, Ambianos decem milia,
Moriuos XXV milia, Menapios VII milia; Caletos X milia; Velocasses et
Veromanduos totidem; Aduatucos decem et novem milia; Condrusos,
Eburones, Caeroesos, Paemanos, qui uno nomine Germani appellantur,
arbitrari ad XL milia. [p. 24 l. 24-32, p. 25 l. 1-23]

5. Caesar Remos cohortatus liberaliterque oratione prosecutus omnem
senatum ad se convenire principumque liberos obsides ad se adduci
iussit. Quae omnia ab his diligenter ad diem facta sunt. Ipse Divitiacum
Aeduum magno opere cohortatus docet quanto opere rei publicae
communisque salutis intersit man us hostium distineri, ne cum tanta
multitudine uno tempore confligendum sit. Id fieri posse, si suas copias
Aedui in fines Bellovacorum introduxeriut et eorum agros populari
coeperint. His mandatis eum ab se dimittit. Postquam omnes Belgarum
copias in unum locum coactas ad se venire vidit neque iam longe abesse
ab iis quos miserat exploratoribus et ab Remis cognovit, flumen Axonam,
quod est in extremis Remorum finibus, exercitum traducere maturavit
atque ibi castra posuit. Quae res et latus unum castrorum ripis fluminis
muniebat et post eum quae essent tuta ab hostibus reddebat, et commeatus
ab Remis reliquisque civitatibus ut sine periculo ad eum portari posset
efficiebat. In eo flumine pons erat. Ibi praesidium ponit et in altera
parte fluminis Q. Titurium Sabinum legatum cum sex cohortibus relinquit.
Castra in altitudinem pedum XII vallo fossaque duodeviginti pedum munire
iubet. [p. 25 l. 24-32, p. 26 l. 1-14]

6. Ab his castris oppidum Remorum nomine Bibrax aberat milia passuum
octo. Id ex itinere magno impetu Belgae oppugnare coeperunt. Aegre eo
die sustentatum est. Gallorum eadem atque Belgarum oppugnatio est haec.
Ubi circumiecta multitudine hominum totis moenibus undique in murum
lapides iaci coepti sunt, murusque defensoribus nudatus est, testudine
facta portas succedunt murumque subruunt. Quod tum facile fiebat. Nam
cum tanta multitudo lapides ac tela conicerent, in muro consistendi
potestas erat nulli. Cum finem oppugnandi nox fecisset, Iccius Remus,
summa nobilitate et gratia inter suos, qui tum oppido praefuerat, unus
ex iis qui legati de pace ad Caesarem venerant, nuntium ad eum mittit:
nisi subsidium sibi submittatur, sese diutius sustinere non posse.
[p. 26 l. 15-29]

7. Eo de media nocte Caesar isdem ducibus usus qui nuntii ab Iccio
venerant, Numidas et Cretas sagittarios et funditores Baleares subsidio
oppidanis mittit; quorum adventu et Remis cum spe defensionis studium
propugnandi accessit, et hostibus eadem de causa spes potiundi oppidi
discessit. Itaque paulisper apud oppidum morati agrosque Remorum
depopulati, omnibus vicis aedificiisque quos adire potuerant incensis,
ad castra Caesaris omnibus copiis contenderunt et ab milibus passuum
minus duobus castra posuerunt; quae castra, ut fumo atque ignibus
significabatur, amplius milibus passuum octo in latitudinem patebant.
[p. 26 l. 30-32, p. 27 l. 1-9]

8. Caesar primo et propter multitudinem hostium et propter eximiam
opinionem virtutis proelio supersedere statuit; cotidie tamen
equestribus proeliis quid hostis virtute posset et quid nostri auderent
periclitabatur. Ubi nostros non esse inferiores intellexit, loco pro
castris ad aciem instruendam natura opportuno atque idoneo--quod is
collis, ubi castra posita erant, paululum ex planitie editus tantum
adversus in latitudinem patebat quantum loci acies instructa occupare
poterat, atque ex utraque parte lateris deiectus habebat et in frontem
leniter fastigatus paulatim ad planitiem redibat--ab utroque latere eius
collis transversam fossam obduxit circiter passuum quadringentorum et ad
extremas fossas castella constituit ibique tormenta conlocavit, ne, cum
aciem instruxisset, hostes, quod tantum multitudine poterant, ab
lateribus pugnantes suos circumvenire possent. Hoc facto duabus
legionibus quas proxime conscripserat in castris relictis, ut, si quo
opus esset, subsidio duci possent, reliquas sex legiones pro castris in
acie constituit. Hostes item suas copias ex castris eductas
instruxerant. [p. 27 l. 10-30]

9. Palus erat non magna inter nostrum atque hostium exercitum. Hanc si
nostri transirent hostes exspectabant; nostri autem, si ab illis initium
transeundi fieret, ut impeditos adgrederentur, parati in armis erant.
Interim proelio equestri inter duas acies contendebatur. Ubi neutri
transeundi initium faciunt, secundiore equitum proelio nostris Caesar
suos in castra reduxit. Hostes protinus ex eo loco ad flumen Axonam
contenderunt, quod esse post nostra castra demonstratum est. Ibi vadis
repertis partem suarum copiarum traducere conati sunt eo consilio, ut,
si possent, castellum cui praeerat Q. Titurius legatus expugnarent
pontemque interscinderent; si minus potuissent, agros Remorum
popularentur, qui magno nobis usui ad bellum gerendum erant, commeatuque
nostros prohiberent. [p. 27 l. 31-32, p. 28 l. 1-13]

10. Caesar certior factus ab Titurio omnem equitatum et levis armaturae
Numidas, funditores sagittariosque pontem traducit atque ad eos
contendit. Acriter in eo loco pugnatum est. Hostes impeditos nostri in
flumine adgressi magnum eorum numerum occiderunt: per eorum corpora
reliquos audacissime transire conantes multitudine telorum reppulerunt;
primos qui transierant equitatu circumventos interfecerunt. Hostes, ubi
et de expugnando oppido et de flumine transeundo spem se fefellisse
intellexerunt neque nostros in locum iniquiorem progredi pugnandi causa
viderunt, atque ipsos res frumentaria deficere coepit, concilio
convocato constituerunt optimum esse domum suam quemque reverti, et,
quorum in fines primum Romani exercitum introduxissent, ad eos
defendendos undique convenirent, ut potius in suis quam in alienis
finibus decertarent et domesticis copiis rei frumentariae uterentur. Ad
eam sententiam cum reliquis causis haec quoque ratio eos deduxit, quod
Divitiacum atque Aeduos finibus Bellovacorum adpropinquare cognoverant.
His persuaderi ut diutis morarentur neque suis auxilium ferrent non
poterat. [p. 28 l. 14-32, p. 29 l. 1-2]

11. Ea re constituta, secunda vigilia magno cum strepitu ac tumultu
castris egressi, nullo certo ordine neque imperio, cum sibi quisque
primum itineris locum peteret et domum pervenire properaret, fecerunt
ut consimilis fugae profectio videretur. Hac re statim Caesar per
speculatores cognita insidias veritus, quod qua de causa discederent
nondum perspexerat, exercitum equitatumque castris continuit. Prima luce
confirmata re ab exploratoribus omnem equitatum qui novissimum agmen
moraretur praemisit. His Q. Pedium et L. Aurunculeium Cottam legatos
praefecit; T. Labienum legatum cum legionibus tribus subsequi iussit. Hi
novissimos adorti et multa milia passuum prosecuti magnam multitudinem
eorum fugientium conciderunt, cum ab extremo agmine ad quos ventum erat
consisterent fortiterque impetum nostrorum militum sustinerent; priores,
quod abesse a periculo viderentur neque ulla necessitate neque imperio
continerentur, exaudito clamore perturbatis ordinibus omnes in fuga sibi
praesidium ponerent. Ita sine ullo periculo tantam eorum multitudinem
nostri interfecerunt quantum fuit diei spatium, sub occasumque solis
destiterunt, seque in castra, ut erat imperatum, receperunt. [p. 29
l. 3-25]

12. Postridie eius diei Caesar, priusquam se hostes ex terrore ac fuga
reciperent, in fines Suessionum, qui proximi Remis erant, exercitum
duxit et magno itinere confecto ad oppidum Noviodunum contendit. Id ex
itinere oppugnare conatus, quod vacuum ab defensoribus esse audiebat,
propter latitudinem fossae murique altitudinem paucis defendentibus
expugnare non potuit. Castris munitis vineas agere quaeque ad
oppugnandum usui erant comparare coepit. Interim omnis ex fuga
Suessionum multitudo in oppidum proxima nocte convenit. Celeriter vineis
ad oppidum actis, aggere iacto turribusque constitutis, magnitudine
operum, quae neque viderant ante Galli neque audierant, et celeritate
Romanorum permoti, legatos ad Caesarem de deditione mittunt et
petentibus Remis ut conservarentur impetrant. [p. 29 l. 26-32, p. 30
l. 1-8]

13. Caesar obsidibus acceptis primis civitatis atque ipsius Galbae regis
duobus filiis, armisque omnibus ex oppido traditis, in deditionem
Suessiones accepit exercitumque in Bellovacos ducit. Qui cum se suaque
omnia in oppidum Bratuspantium contulissent, atque ab eo oppido Caesar
cum exercitu circiter milia passuum quinque abesset, omnes maiores natu
ex oppido egressi manus ad Caesarem tendere et voce significare
coeperunt sese in eius fidem ac potestatem venire neque contra populum
Romanum armis contendere. Item, cum ad oppidum accessisset castraque ibi
poneret, pueri mulieresque ex muro passis manibus suo more pacem ab
Romanis petierunt. [p. 30 l. 9-20]

14. Pro his Divitiacus--nam post discessum Belgarum dimissis Aeduorum
copiis ad eum reverterat--facit verba: Bellovacos omni tempore in fide
atque amicitia civitatis Aeduae fuisse: impulsos a suis principibus,
qui dicerent Aeduos ab Caesare in servitutem redactos omnes indignitates
contumeliasque perferre, et ab Aeduis defecisse et populo Romano bellum
intulisse. Qui eius consili principes fuissent, quod intellegerent
quantam calamitatem civitati intulissent, in Britanniam profugisse.
Petere non solum Bellovacos sed etiam pro his Aeduos ut sua clementia ac
mansuetudine in eos utatur. Quod si fecerit, Aeduorum auctoritatem apud
omnes Belgas amplificaturum, quorum auxiliis atque opibus, si qua bella
inciderint, sustentare consuerint. [p. 30 l. 21-32, p. 31 l. 1-2]

15. Caesar honoris Divitiaci atque Aeduorum causa sese eos in fidem
recepturum et conservaturum dixit; quod erat civitas magna inter Belgas
auctoritate atque hominum multitudine praestabat, sexcentos obsides
poposcit. His traditis omnibusque armis ex oppido conlatis, ab eo loco
in fines Ambianorum pervenit, qui se suaque omnia sine mora dediderunt.
Eorum fines Nervii attingebant; quorum de natura moribusque Caesar cum
quaereret, sic reperiebat: Nullum aditum esse ad eos mercatoribus; nihil
pati vini reliquarumque rerum inferri, quod iis rebus relanguescere
animos eorum et remitti virtutem existimarent: esse homines feros
magnaeque virtutis; increpitare atque incusare reliquos Belgas qui se
populo Romano dedidissent patriamque virtutem proiecissent; confirmare
sese neque legatos missuros neque ullam condicionem pacis accepturos.
[p. 31 l. 3-18]

16. Cum per eorum fines triduum iter fecisset, inveniebat ex captivis
Sabim flumen ab castris suis non amplius milia passuum X abesse: trans
id flumen omnes Nervios consedisse adventumque ibi Romanorum exspectare
una cum Atrebatis et Veromanduis finitimis suis, nam his utrisque
persuaserant uti eandem belli fortunam experirentur; exspectari etiam ab
his Aduatucorum copias atque esse in itinere; mulieres quique per
aetatem ad pugnam inutiles viderentur in eum locum coniecisse, quo
propter paludes exercitui aditus non esset. [p. 31 l. 19-28]

17. His rebus cognitis exploratores centurionesque praemittit qui locum
idoneum castris deligant. Cum ex dediticiis Belgis reliquisque Gallis
complures Caesarem secuti una iter facerent, quidam ex his, ut postea ex
captivis cognitum est, eorum dierum consuetudine itineris nostri
exercitus perspecta, nocte ad Nervios pervenerunt atque his
demonstrarunt inter singulas legiones impedimentorum magnum numerum
intercedere, neque esse quicquam negoti, cum prima legio in castra
venisset, reliquaeque legiones magnum spatium abessent, hanc sub
sarcinis adoriri; qua pulsa impedimentisque direptis futurum ut reliquae
contra consistere non auderent. Adiuvabat etiam eorum consilium qui rem
deferebant, quod Nervii antiquitus, cum equitatu nihil possent (neque
enim ad hoc tempus ei rei student, sed quicquid possunt, pedestribus
valent copiis) quo facilius finitimorum equitatum, si praedandi causa ad
eos venissent, impedirent, teneris arboribus incisis atque inflexis,
crebrisque in latitudinem ramis enatis, et rubis sentibusque
interiectis, effecerant ut instar muri hae saepes munimenta praeberent,
quo non modo non intrari sed ne perspici quidem posset. His rebus cum
iter agminis nostri impediretur, non omittendum sibi consilium Nervii
existimaverunt. [p. 31 l. 29-32, p. 32 l. 1-20]

18. Loci natura erat haec, quem locum nostri castris delegerant. Collis
ab summo aequaliter declivis ad flumen Sabim, quod supra nominavimus,
vergebat. Ab eo flumine pari adclivitate collis nascebatur adversus huic
et contrarius, passus circiter ducentos infimus apertus, ab superiore
parte silvestris ut non facile introrsus perspici posset. Intra eas
silvas hostes in occulto sese continebant; in aperto loco secundum
flumen paucae stationes equitum videbantur. Fluminis erat altitudo pedum
circiter trium. [p. 32 l. 21-30]

19. Caesar equitatu praemisso subsequebatur omnibus copiis; sed ratio
ordoque agminis aliter se habebat ac Belgae ad Nervios detulerant. Nam
quod ad hostes adpropinquabat, consuetudine sua Caesar sex legiones
expeditas ducebat; post eas totius exercitus impedimenta conlocarat;
inde duae legiones quae proxime conscriptae erant totum agmen claudebant
praesidioque impedimentis erant. Equites nostri, cum funditoribus
sagittariisque flumen transgressi, cum hostium equitatu proelium
commiserunt. Cum se illi identidem in silvas ad suos reciperent ac
rursus ex silva in nostros impetum facerent, neque nostri longius quam
quem ad finem porrecta loca aperta pertinebant cedentes insequi
auderent, interim legiones sex, quae primae venerant, opere dimenso
castra munire coeperunt. Ubi prima impedimenta nostri exercitus ab iis
qui in silvis abditi latebant visa sunt, quod tempus inter eos
committendi proeli convenerat, ut intra silvas aciem ordinesque
constituerant atque ipsi sese confirmaverant, subito omnibus copiis
provolaverunt impetumque in nostros equites fecerunt. His facile pulsis
ac proturbatis, incredibili celeritate ad flumen decucurrerunt, ut paene
uno tempore et ad silvas et in flumine et iam in manibus nostris hostes
viderentur. Eadem autem celeritate adverso colle ad nostra castra atque
eos qui in opere occupati erant contenderunt. [p. 32 l. 31-32, p. 33
l. 1-23]

20. Caesari omnia uno tempore erant agenda: vexillum proponendum, quod
erat insigne cum ad arma concurri oporteret, signum tuba dandum, ab
opere revocandi milites, qui paulo longius aggeris petendi causa
processerant arcessendi, acies instruenda, milites cohortandi,
signum dandum. Quarum rerum magnam partem temporis brevitas et
successus hostium impediebat. His difficultatibus duae res erant
subsidio--scientia atque usus militum, quod superioribus proeliis
exercitati, quid fieri oporteret non minus commode ipsi sibi
praescribere quam ab aliis doceri poterant; et quod ab opere singulisque
legionibus singulos legatos Caesar discedere nisi munitis castris
vetuerat. Hi propter propinquitatem et celeritatem hostium nihil iam
Caesaris imperium exspectabant, sed per se quae videbantur
administrabant. [p. 33 l. 24-32, p. 34 l. 1-6]

21. Caesar necessariis rebus imperatis ad cohortandos milites quam in
partem fors obtulit decucurrit et ad legionem decimam devenit. Milites
non longiore oratione cohortatus quam uti suae pristinae virtutis
memoriam retinerent neu perturbarentur animo hostiumque impetum fortiter
sustinerent, quod non longius hostes aberant quam quo telum adici
posset, proeli committendi signum dedit. Atque in alteram partem item
cohortandi causa profectus pugnantibus occurrit. Temporis tanta fuit
exiguitas hostiumque tam paratus ad dimicandum animus, ut non modo ad
insignia adcommodanda, sed etiam ad galeas induendas scutisque tegimenta
detrudenda tempus defuerit. Quam quisque ab opere in partem casu devenit
quaeque prima signa conspexit, ad haec constitit, ne in quaerendis suis
pugnandi tempus dimitteret. [p. 34 l. 7-22]

22. Instructo exercitu magis ut loci natura deiectusque collis et
necessitas temporis quam ut rei militaris ratio atque ordo postulabat,
cum diversis legionibus aliae alia in parte hostibus resisterent,
saepibusque densissimis, ut ante demonstravimus, interiectis prospectus
impediretur, neque certa subsidia conlocari, neque quid in quaque parte
opus esset provideri, neque ab uno omnia imperia administrari poterant.
Itaque in tanta rerum iniquitate, fortunae quoque eventus varii
sequebantur. [p. 34 l. 23-31]

23. Legionis nonae et decimae milites, ut in sinistra parte acie
constiterant, pilis emissis, cursu ac lassitudine exanimatos
vulneribusque confectos Atrebates--nam his ea pars obvenerat--celeriter
ex loco superiore in flumen compulerunt et transire conantes insecuti
gladiis magnam partem eorum impeditam interfecerunt. Ipsi transire
flumen non dubitaverunt, et in locum iniquum progressi, rursus
resistentes hostes redintegrato proelio in fugam coniecerunt. Item alia
in parte diversae duae legiones, undecima et octava, profligatis
Veromanduis, quibuscum erant congressi, ex loco superiore in ipsis
fluminis ripis proeliabantur. At totis fere a fronte et ab sinistra
parte nudatis castris, cum in dextro cornu legio duodecima et non magno
ab ea intervallo septima constitisset, omnes Nervii confertissimo agmine
duce Boduognato qui summam imperi tenebat, ad eum locum contenderunt;
quorum pars aperto latere legiones circumvenire, pars summum castrorum
locum petere coepit. [p. 35 l. 1-18]

24. Eodem tempore equites nostri levisque armaturae pedites, qui cum iis
una fuerant, quos primo hostium impetu pulsos dixeram, cum se in castra
reciperent, adversis hostibus occurrebant ac rursus aliam in partem
fugam petebant; et calones, qui ab decumana porta ac summo iugo collis
nostros victores flumen transisse conspexerant, praedandi causa egressi,
cum respexissent et hostes in nostris castris versari vidissent,
praecipites fugae sese mandabant. Simul eorum qui cum impedimentis
veniebant clamor fremitusque oriebatur, aliique aliam in partem
perterriti ferebantur. Quibus omnibus rebus permoti equites Treveri,
quorum inter Gallos virtutis opinio est singularis, qui auxili causa ab
civitate ad Caesarem missi venerant, cum multitudine hostium castra
compleri, legiones premi et paene circumventas teneri, calones, equites,
funditores, Numidas, diversos dissipatosque in omnes partes fugere
vidissent, desperatis nostris rebus domum contenderunt; Romanos pulsos
superatosque, castris impedimentisque eorum hostes potitos civitati
renuntiaverunt. [p. 35 l. 19-32, p. 36 l. 1-6]

25. Caesar ab decimae legionis cohortatione ad dextrum cornu profectus,
ubi suos urgeri signisque in unum locum conlatis duodecimae legionis
confertos milites sibi ipsos ad pugnam esse impedimento vidit--quartae
cohortis omnibus centurionibus occisis signiferoque interfecto, signo
amisso, reliquarum cohortium omnibus fere centurionibus aut vulneratis
aut occisis, in his primipilo P. Sextio Baculo, fortissimo viro, multis
gravibusque vulneribus confecto ut iam se sustinere non posset, reliquos
esse tardiores, et nonnullos ab novissimis deserto proelio excedere ac
tela vitare, hostes neque a fronte ex inferiore loco subeuntes
intermittere et ab utroque latere instare, et rem esse in angusto vidit,
neque ullum esse subsidium quod submitti posset--scuto ab novissimis uni
militi detracto, quod ipse eo sine scuto venerat, in primam aciem
processit centurionibusque nominatim appellatis reliquos cohortatus
milites signa inferre et manipulos laxare iussit, quo facilius gladiis
uti possent. Cuius adventu spe inlata militibus ac redintegrato animo,
cum pro se quisque in conspectu imperatoris etiam in extremis suis rebus
operam navare cuperet, paulum hostium impetus tardatus est. [p. 36
l. 7-28]

26. Caesar cum septimam legionem, quae iuxta constiterat, item urgeri ab
hoste vidisset, tribunes militum monuit ut paulatim sese legiones
coniungerent et conversa signa in hostes inferrent. Quo facto, cum alius
alii subsidium ferret, neque timerent ne aversi ab hoste
circumvenirentur, audacius resistere ac fortius pugnare coeperunt.
Interim milites legionum duarum, quae in novissimo agmine praesidio
impedimentis fuerant, proelio nuntiato cursu incitato in summo colle ab
hostibus conspiciebantur; et T. Labienus castris hostium potitus et ex
loco superiore quae res in nostris castris gererentur conspicatus
decimam legionem subsidio nostris misit. Qui cum ex equitum et calonum
fuga, quo in loco res esset, quantoque in periculo et castra et legiones
et imperator versaretur, cognovissent, nihil ad celeritatem sibi reliqui
fecerunt. [p. 36 l. 29-32, p. 37 l. 1-12]

27. Horum adventu tanta rerum commutatio est facta ut nostri, etiam qui
vulneribus confecti procubuissent, scutis innixi proelium
redintegrarent; tum calones perterritos hostes conspicati etiam inermes
armatis occurrerent; equites vero, ut turpitudinem fugae virtute
delerent, omnibus in locis pugnae se legionariis militibus praeferrent.
At hostes etiam in extrema spe salutis tantam virtutem praestiterunt ut,
cum primi eorum cecidissent, proximi iacentibus insisterent atque ex
eorum corporibus pugnarent; his deiectis et coacervatis cadaveribus, qui
superessent ut ex tumulo tela in nostros conicerent et pila intercepta
remitterent: ut non nequiquam tantae virtutis homines indicari deberet
ausos esse transire latissimum flumen, ascendere altissimas ripas,
subire iniquissimum locum; quae facilia ex difficillimis animi magnitudo
redegerat. [p. 37 l. 13-28]

28. Hoc proelio facto et prope ad internecionem gente ac nomine
Nerviorum redacto maiores natu, quos una cum pueris mulieribusque in
aestuaria ac paludes coniectos dixeramus, hac pugna nuntiata, cum
victoribus nihil impeditum, victis nihil tutum arbitrarentur, omnium qui
supererant consensu legatos ad Caesarem miserunt seque ei dediderunt; et
in commemoranda civitatis calamitate ex sexcentis ad tres senatores, ex
hominum milibus LX vix ad quingentos qui arma ferre possent sese
redactos esse dixerunt. Quos Caesar, ut in miseros ac supplices usus
misericordia videretur, diligentissime conservavit suisque finibus atque
oppidis uti iussit, et finitimis imperavit ut ab iniuria et maleficio se
suosque prohiberent. [p. 37 l. 29-32, p. 38 l. 1-9]

29. Aduatuci, de quibus supra scripsimus, cum omnibus copiis auxilio
Nerviis venirent, hac pugna nuntiata ex itinere domum reverterunt;
cunctis oppidis castellisque desertis sua omnia in unum oppidum egregie
natura munitum contulerunt. Quod cum ex omnibus in circuitu partibus
altissimas rapes despectusque haberet, una ex parte leniter adclivis
aditus in latitudinem non amplius ducentorum pedum relinquebatur; quem
locum duplici altissimo muro munierant, tum magni ponderis saxa et
praeacutas trabes in muro conlocabant. Ipsi erant ex Cimbris Teutonisque
prognati, qui, cum iter in provinciam nostram atque Italiam facerent,
iis impedimentis, quae secum agere ac portare non poterant, citra flumen
Rhenum depositis custodiam ex suis ac praesidium sex milia hominum una
reliquerunt. Hi post eorum obitum multos annos a finitimis exagitati,
cum alias bellum inferrent, alias inlatum defenderent, consensu eorum
omnium pace facta hunc sibi domicilio locum delegerunt. [p. 38 l. 10-27]

30. Ac primo adventu exercitus nostri crebras ex oppido excursiones
faciebant parvulisque proeliis cum nostris contendebant; postea vallo
pedum XII in circuitu XV milium crebrisque castellis circummuniti oppido
sese continebant. Ubi vineis actis aggere exstructo turrim procul
constitui viderunt, primum inridere ex muro atque increpitare vocibus,
quod tanta machinatio ab tanto spatio instrueretur: quibusnam manibus
aut quibus viribus praesertim homines tantulae staturae--nam plerumque
hominibus Gallis prae magnitudine corporum suorum brevitas nostra
contemptui est--tanti oneris turrim in muro sese conlocare confiderent?
[p. 38 l. 28-32, p. 39 l. 1-7]

31. Ubi vero moveri et adpropinquare moenibus viderunt, nova atque
inusitata specie commoti legates ad Caesarem de pace miserunt, qui ad
hunc modum locuti: ‘Non existimare Romanos sine ope divina bellum
gerere, qui tantae altitudinis machinationes tanta celeritate promovere
possent; se suaque omnia eorum potestati permittere’ dixerunt. ‘Unum
petere ac deprecari: si forte pro sua clementia ac mansuetudine, quam
ipsi ab aliis audirent, statuisset Aduatucos esse conservandos, ne se
armis despoliaret. Sibi omnes fere finitimos esse inimicos ac suae
virtuti invidere; a quibus se defendere traditis armis non possent. Sibi
praestare, si in eum casum deducerentur, quamvis fortunam a populo
Romano pati, quam ab his per cruciatum interfici, inter quos dominari
consuessent.’ [p. 39 l. 8-22]

32. Ad haec Caesar respondit: ‘Se magis consuetudine sua quam merito
eorum civitatem conservaturum, si prius quam murum aries attigisset se
dedidissent; sed deditionis nullam esse condicionem nisi armis traditis.
Se id quod in Nerviis fecisset facturum finitimisque imperaturum, ne
quam dediticiis populi Romani iniuriam inferrent.’ Re nuntiata ad suos,
quae imperarentur facere dixerunt. Armorum magna multitudine de muro in
fossam quae erat ante oppidum iacta sic ut prope summam muri aggerisque
altitudinem acervi armorum adaequarent, et tamen circiter parte tertia,
ut postea perspectum est, celata atque in oppido retenta, portis
patefactis eo die pace sunt usi. [p. 39 l. 23-32, p. 40 l. 1-3]

33. Sub vesperum Caesar portas claudi militesque ex oppido exire iussit,
ne quam noctu oppidani ab militibus iniuriam acciperent. Illi ante
inito, ut intellectum est, consilio, quod deditione facta nostros
praesidia deducturos aut denique indiligentius servaturos
crediderant--partim cum iis quae retinuerant et celaverant armis,
partim scutis ex cortice factis aut viminibus intextis, quae subito, ut
temporis exiguitas postulabat, pellibus induxerant--tertia vigilia, qua
minime arduus ad nostras munitiones ascensus videbatur, omnibus copiis
repentino ex oppido eruptionem fecerunt. Celeriter, ut ante Caesar
imperarat, ignibus significatione facta ex proximis castellis eo
concursum est, pugnatumque ab hostibus ita acriter est ut a viris
fortibus in extrema spe salutis iniquo loco contra eos qui ex vallo
turribusque tela iacerent pugnari debuit, cum in una virtute omnis spes
salutis consisteret. Occisis ad hominum milibus quattuor reliqui in
oppidum reiecti sunt. Postridie eius diei refractis portis, cum iam
defenderet nemo, atque intromissis militibus nostris sectionem eius
oppidi universam Caesar vendidit. Ab iis qui emerant capitum numerus ad
eum relatus est milium quinquaginta trium. [p. 40 l. 4-25]

34. Eodem tempore a P. Crasso, quem cum legione una miserat ad Venetos,
Unellos, Osismos, Curiosolitas, Esuvios, Aulercos, Redones, quae sunt
maritimae civitates Oceanumque attingunt, certior factus est omnes eas
civitates in dicionem potestatemque populi Romani esse redactas. [p. 40
l. 26-31]

35. His rebus gestis omni Gallia pacata, tanta huius belli ad barbaros
opinio perlata est uti ab iis nationibus, quae trans Rhenum incolerent
mitterentur legati ad Caesarem, qui se obsides daturas, imperata
facturas pollicerentur. Quas legationes Caesar, quod in Italiam
Illyricumque properabat, inita proxima aestate ad se reverti iussit.
Ipse in Carnutes, Andes Turonesque, quae civitates propinquae his locis
erant ubi bellum gesserat, legionibus in hibernacula deductis, in
Italiam profectus est. Ob easque res ex litteris Caesaris dies quindecim
supplicatio decreta est, quod ante id tempus accidit nulli. [p. 41
l. 1-11]




NOTES.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.--To translate Latin into English is to express the
meaning of the Latin in English words and in English idiom. But the
meaning must be discovered before it can be expressed. Discovering the
sense is, therefore, a process preparatory to translation, but yet
measurably distinct from it. For discovering the meaning, the golden
rule is, _Take words and clauses in the order in which they stand_. If
the first chapter of this book were rendered into English words exactly
in the Latin order, the thought would be readily apprehended by any one
quite unacquainted with Latin. Such a word for word rendering, mental or
oral, is for the beginner a necessary preliminary to translation, but,
I repeat, must not be confounded with translation. For that, the golden
rule is, _Express the thought in pure English, without admixture of
Latin idiom_.


Notes under the heading CHAP. refer to the simplified text; those that
follow, under the heading PAGE, supplement the former and refer to the
unchanged text. The grammatical references are to the Latin Grammars of
Allen & Greenough and Harkness.

[Transcriber’s Note:

In the printed text, the word “line” recurs at the beginning of each
page. For this e-text, it is repeated at the beginning of each chapter
instead. Page references are included for completeness.]


CHAP. 1,

line 2. +certior fīēbat+: _he was made more certain_ = _he was
informed_.

+fīēbat+: the passive of +facio+. Review the forms. 142; H. 294.

4. +Coniūrandi+: pronounce the _i_ of the second syllable like _y_.

5. +verēbantur+: the subject is +Belgae+, understood; supply the same
subject for +sollicitābantur+.

+ad se+: refers to the subject of +verēbantur+.

6. +Germānos+: subject-accusative of +versāri+; _that the Germans should
remain_.

8. +exercitum+: subject-accusative of +hiemāre+ and +inveterāscere+.

+inveterāscere+: _get a foothold_; but what is its primary meaning from
its derivation?

10. +imperiis+: 227 e, 3; H. 385.

11. +iis+: supply mentally +ab+ before it.

13. +qui+: _and these_, referring to +potentiōres+, etc.

+eam rem+: read again the preceding sentence, and you will see to what
+eam rem+ refers.

+imperio nostro+: _under our_ (i.e. Roman) _rule_. The ablative implies
condition, and the meaning is, _if we should get the sovereignty_. 255,
d, 4; H. 431, 2, (3).

PAGE 23,

1. +ita uti+: _as_.

3. +Labiēni+: Cæsar’s lieutenant was now in the country of the Sequani.
See a map of +Gallia+.

4. +quam+: _whose country_. We might expect +quos+ referring to
+Belgas+, but the relative is made to agree with the predicate noun
+partem+.

6. +has esse causas+: depending on +rūmōres adferēbantur+, like +Belgas
... coniūrāre+ and +obsides ... dare+. 272; H.

7. +omni ... Gallia+: all except their country.

+pācāta+: the Romans, with cruel humor, called a country “pacified” when
they had enslaved it.

8. +partim qui+: _some of whom_.

9. +ut ... ita+: _as ... so_.

11. +partim qui+: _others of whom_.

12. +ab nōnnūllis etiam+: these, then, are the third class by whom it is
said, +Belgae sollicitābantur+: first, the conservative and patriotic;
second, the restless and dissatisfied; third, the selfish and ambitious.


CHAP. 2,

line 2. +interiōrem Galliam+: _the interior of Gaul_; that is, Gaul
beyond the Alps. Refer constantly to a map.

3. +qui ... dēdūceret+: +qui+ refers to +Q. Pedium+, and the clause +qui
... dēdūceret+ denotes purpose, _to lead_.

4. +Ipse+: supply +Caesar+.

6. +Ea+ = +eas res+, as shown by +rēbus+ following.

8. +manus cōgi+: _that parties of men were gathering_. The construction
is the same as +Belgas ... coniūrāre+, in chap. 1.

9. +condūci+: _was mustering_; a very different meaning in chap. 1.

+quīn ... proficīscerētur+: _to march_. What literally?

PAGE 23,

18. +inita aestāte+: _when summer had begun_ = _at the beginning of
summer_; marks the time of +dēdūceret+, not of +mīsit+.

PAGE 24,

1. +Dat negōtium+: _he charges_. What literally?

2. +uti+ (same as +ut+) ... +cōgnōscant+: _to find out_; the clause
depends on +dat negōtium+.

3. +se+: refers to Caesar.

+certiōrem faciant+: compare the passive form in chap. 1.

5. +dubitandum+: in full the sentence would be, +Caesar dubitandum esse
sibi nōn exīstimāvit+; and the word for word rendering, _Cæsar did not
think an-obligation-of-hesitating to be to himself_. Translate, _he
ought to hesitate_.


CHAP. 3,

line 1. +Eo+: that is, +ad fīnes Belgārum+. See the end of chap. 2.

3. +se ... permittere+: here +se+ is the subject-accusative of
+permittere+.

+in fidem+: _to the protection_.

6. +Caesaris imperāta facere+: _to do what Cæsar required_. Literally
what?

7. +oppidis recipere+: in meaning = +in oppida recipere+.

+cēteris+: not _other_, but _all other_. Their submission is abject.

9. +sēse+: not different from +se+.

10. +Suessiōnes+: the object of +dēterrēre+.

12. +iūre+: _constitution_.

+īsdem+: oftener written +iīsdem+, 101, c.

PAGE 24,

9. +omni opīniōne+: _than any one could expect_. 247, b; H. 417.

10. +ex Belgis+ = +Belgārum+, or +inter Belgas+.

12. +qui dīcerent+: compare +qui dēdūceret+, p. 23, l. 19, and note on
simplified text.

+se+: the object (with +sua omnia+ = _their all_) of +permittere+.
Another +se+ must be mentally supplied as the subject of +permittere+.

18. +incolant+: why not +incolunt+, for it must be translated as if it
were +incolunt+? Because the clause +qui ... incolant+ depends on the
clause +Germānos ... coniūnxisse+. It is therefore _a dependent clause
of indirect discourse_, and as such must have the subjunctive.
Thoroughly master this, the most important principle of Latin syntax.
Mark how the descriptive clause, +qui ... incolant+, _is framed into_
the main clause.

+line+ 19. +furōrem+: the politic or cowardly Remi considered the love
of liberty and independence of their brother Belgæ _blind passion_.

20. +qui ... ūtantur+: _though they ... enjoyed._ +qui+, then, must
sometimes be rendered _though he, though they_, etc., but only when the
subjunctive follows.

21. +ūtantur+: supply immediately following +atque+.

22. +ipsis+: refers to +Rēmi+.

23. +quīn ... cōnsentīrent+: _from ... uniting._ Compare +quīn ...
proficīscerētur+, p. 24, l. 6, and note on simplified text.


CHAP. 4,

line 1. +quantae+: refers to extent of country and population.

+in armis essent+: connect with +quae cīvitātes+: _what states were in
arms, and how powerful they were_.

2. +quid in bello possent+: a literal translation, _what they could_
(do) _in war_, does not convey the meaning. Render, _what force they
could bring into the field_.

4. +ibi+: +cis Rhēnum+.

6. +ex re+: equivalent to +ex causa+.

7. +fīēbat+: _it was coming about._ The Remi said, in direct discourse,
+fit+; and below, +sūmant+.

+spīritus+: means in the singular _air_, and is here used just as we use
“airs,” in the phrase “to put on airs.”

8. +omnia ... explōrāta+: _full information_.

9. +Quantam quisque+: notice the order. +Quisque+ likes to stand after
+quantus+, +quotus+, +se+, and +suus+; here it means _each nation_.

11. +Plūrimum ... valēbant+: about equivalent to +plūrimum poterant+,
_had the most power_.

18. +cum ... tum+: _not only ... but also_.

19. +Britanniae+: “the first mention of Britain by a Roman author.”

PAGE 24,

27. +propter fertilitātem+: to be connected with +cōnsēdisse+.

28. +incolerent+: why not +incolēbant+? See note on p. 24, l. 18, +qui
... incolant+.

29. +memoria+: _within the memory_; but two lines below, _because of the
memory_.

PAGE 25,

10. +nostra etiam memoria+: compare +patrum nostrōrum memoria+, p. 24,
l. 29.

13. +obtinuerit+: _held_, not _obtained_, which is usually expressed by
+adsecūtus est+, +cōnsecūtus est+, or +adeptus est+.

15. +omnium voluntāte+: _with the assent of all_.

23. +arbitrāri+: that is, +Rēmos arbitrāri+.


CHAP. 5,

line 2. +obsides+: _as hostages_, in apposition with +līberos+. What
would have been the fate of these, if the chieftains had broken their
pledges?

4. +Rēi pūblicae interest+: _it concerns the_ (Roman) _republic_. The
real subject of +interest+, represented in English by _it_, is +manus
hostium distinēri+.

+manus+: the subject-accusative of +distinēri+, _to be kept from
uniting_.

6. +ne ... cōnflīgendum sit+: _that it may not be necessary to fight_.

7. +intrōdūxerint+: the Roman way of speaking is: this can be done, if
that _shall be done, or shall have been done_; hence the future perfect.
But mark that such a future or future perfect is often best rendered by
a present.

9. +coāctas ... venīre+: _having been assembled ... to be coming_ = _had
assembled ... and were coming_.

10. +vīdit+ = +intellēxit+.

+neque iam+ = +et iam nōn+.

+iis+: take with +explōrātōribus+.

13. +quae res+: that is, his crossing the river and fixing his camp
there.

14. +post eum quae essent+ = +ea quae post eum essent+, _his rear_. What
should you expect in place of +eum+?

+tūta+: goes with the whole expression, +post eum quae essent+.

16. +portāri+: _to be brought down the river to him_.

19. +in altitūdinem+: _to the height_.

20. +duodēvīginti pedum+: that is, +in lātitūdinem+, _in width_.

PAGE 25,

24. +līberāliterque ōrātiōne prōsecūtus+: līberāliter means _in a
generous or kindly manner_; +ōrātiōne+ indicates in what sense
+prōsecūtus+ is to be taken, _accompanying with words_; finally,
+prōsequor+ has its common meaning of _accompany_, but with the meaning
unusually applied: Cæsar had encouraged the Remi, and he _accompanies
the encouragement with kind words_. Translate, _Cæsar encouraging the
Remi and adding kind words_.

29. +commūnis salūtis+: by the _common interests_ Cæsar means those of
the Ædui and the Romans.

30. +cōnflīgendum sit+: compare +dubitandum (esse)+ p. 24, l. 5, and
read the note. Here, as there, +sibi+, referring to Cæsar and the Ædui,
must be mentally supplied, showing for whom the duty or necessity of
action (hesitating, fighting) exists.

31. +Id fieri posse+: depends upon +docet+. To what does +id+ refer?

PAGE 26,

1. +Postquam ... vīdit ... cōgnōvit, ... mātūrāvit+: _when he saw ...
and found out_, (then) ... _he hastened_.

3. +neque ... cōgnōvit+: _and from those scouts_, etc., _found out that
they_ (the Belgæ) _were now not far distant_.

8. +et+ connects +reddēbat+ and +efficiēbat+, which have the same
subject, +quae res+. The order makes this sentence difficult. Cæsar
might have written: +et efficiēbat ut commeātus ab Rēmis reliquīsque
cīvitātibus sine perīculo ad eum portāri posset+. The order is so
perplexed and perplexing because Cæsar wrote in haste, and because he
began with the word which was uppermost in his mind, +commeātus+.


CHAP. 6,

line 2. +ex itinere+: _immediately after their march_.

3. +sustentātum est+: _the Remi held out._ What literally?

4. +Gallōrum ... oppūgnātio+: _the mode of attacking towns common to the
Gauls and Belgæ_.

5. +tōtis moenibus+: dative, though by some thought to be an ablative,
_all around the walls_. 228; H. 386, 2.

7. +testūdine facta+: _forming a testudo._ What the soldiers did was to
lap their shields over their heads.

8. +cum+: _since._ What mode follows +cum+ in this sense?

11. +nūntium ... mittit+: one of the expressions that are followed by
the accusative and infinitive; here, +sēse ... posse+. Compare in
chapter 1, +certior fīēbat+, followed by +Belgas ... coniūrāre+; in
chap. 4, +reperiēbat+, followed by +Belgas ortos esse+, in complete
text.

+Iccius Rēmus+: _Iccius, a Remian_.

13. +sēse+: subject-accusative of +posse+.

PAGE 26,

19. +moenibus ... mūrum ... mūrus ... mūrum+: Cæsar’s haste in writing
is often manifest.

20. +coepti sunt+: it may seem strange that the passive should be used
instead of the active, +coepērunt+; but see 143, a; H. 297, 1.

22. +Quod+: how is a relative after a period often best rendered? For an
example, see note on +qui+, chap. 1, l. 13, simplified text.

24. +nūlli+: mark the emphasis from the position. Many similar cases
occur, notwithstanding A. & G., p. 389, Rem.

+oppūgnandi+ = +oppūgnātiōnis+.

25. +summa nōbilitāte et grātia+: a descriptive ablative; _a man of the
highest rank and popularity_.

26. +praefuerat+: render as if an imperfect. The meaning is, he had been
placed in command and was then in command.

+ex iis+: the same as +eōrum+.

27. +lēgāti+: _as envoy_. Compare the use of +obsides+ as an appositive,
p. 25, l. 26.

28. +submittātur+: can you make out the force of the +sub+?


CHAP. 7,

line 2. +subsidio oppidānis+: _to aid the people in the town_. But what
literally? For the construction, see 233, a; H. 390.

3. +quōrum adventu+: _in consequence of their coming_.

5. +contendērunt+: the subject is +hostes+, suggested by +hostībus+ in
the preceding sentence.

6. +ab+: _distant, off, away_; so used chiefly with numerals.

+ab mīlibus passuum minus duōbus+: a word for word rendering would be,
_distant thousands of paces less than two_; that is, _less than two
miles distant_.

PAGE 26,

3. +neque ... cōgnōvit+: _and learned from those scouts whom he had sent
and from the Remi that they were now not far distant_.

30. +īsdem ducibus+: _the same persons as guides._ Compare +qui lēgāti+,
p. 26, l. 27, and note on simplified text.

PAGE 27,

3. +apud oppidum+: +ad+ is more usual.

4. +agros ... dēpopulāti--vīcis aedificiīsque ... incēnsis+: literally,
_having laid waste the fields--the villages and buildings having been
burned_. Mark how the construction changes for want of a deponent verb
in place of +incendo+.

9. +in lātitūdinem+: compare +in altitūdinem+, p. 26, l. 13.


CHAP. 8,

line 2. +eximiam ... virtūtis+: _their eminent reputation for valor_.

3. +quid virtūte posset+: _what their real eminence in valor was_.
Compare +quid in bello possent+, chap. 4, l. 2.

7. +tantum ... patēbat quantum loci+: render as if +loci+ depended on
+tantum+ instead of +quantum+, _extended over as much space as_.

+adversus+: _facing the enemy_; +adversus+ an adjective, agreeing with
+collis+.

+in lātitūdinem+: _laterally._ Compare chap. 7, l. 8.

8. +ex utrāque parte lateris+ = +ex utrōque latere+: _on_, not _from_,
_both sides_; so +ab+, below, l. 10.

10. +ad plānitiem redībat+: _gradually resumed_ (impf.) _a level_. Cæsar
describes a hill over against the enemy, having steep sides, and a front
only broad enough for his army when arranged for battle. In front the
hill rose with a gentle ascent, and at the top blended with the plain.
It is possible that +lēniter fastīgātus+ means, as the dictionaries
define this passage and as many editors say, _gently sloping down_; in
which case, +ad plānitiem redībat+ would mean _sank down gradually to
the level at its base_. This attributes an improbable meaning to
+fastīgātus+.

12. +extrēmas fossas+: _at the ends of the trenches_; compare in chap.
2, l. 2, +interiōrem Galliam+, _the interior of Gaul_.

+castella+: there were, then, four.

17. +ēductas īnstrūxerant+: to make good English, render as if +ēductas+
were a verb followed by +et+; so, very often, when a perfect participle
and verb are closely connected.

PAGE 27,

10. +et ... et+: we do not say _both ... and_ so frequently as we find
+et ... et+ in Latin; accordingly it will generally be found better to
omit in translation the first +et+, and render the second _and also_.

11. +proelio ... proeliis+: _a decisive battle ... skirmishes_.

14. +loco+: ablative absolute, _as there was a place_.

21. +obdūxit+: Cæsar elsewhere commonly uses +perdūco+ of running a wall
or trench. Why +obdūco+ here? Because the +fossae+ were dug _against_
the enemy, or to _cover his position_.

24. +cum ... īnstrūxisset+: Cæsar’s thought was, according to Latin
idiom, _when I shall have drawn up_, +īnstrūxero+; but such a future
perfect of direct speech becomes pluperfect subjunctive in narration,
after a past tense in the principal clause.

24. +quod ... poterant+: _because they were so strong in numbers_. Find
two other similar uses of +possum+.

27. +si quo opus esset+: _if there should be need of them anywhere_;
not, _if there should be need of any thing_.

28. +subsidio+: in meaning and construction like +subsidio+, p. 26,
l. 32.


CHAP. 9,

line 2. +si ... trānsīrent+: _to see if our men would cross this_
(+hanc+).

3. +contendēbātur+: _there was fighting._ Compare chap. 6, l. 3,
+sustentātum est+.

4. +neutri+: _neither of the two armies_.

5. +secundiōre ... nostris+: _as the cavalry skirmish proved rather
favorable to our men_.

9. +castellum+: read over again the last half of chap. 5. Cæsar makes no
mention there of a +castellum+.

10. +potuissent+: the thought was, according to the Latin idiom, “if we
shall not have been able” (+potuerimus+); but such a future perfect of
direct speech becomes a pluperfect subjunctive in narration after a past
tense.

PAGE 28,

1. +nostri autem+, etc.: a difficult sentence; but treat it as directed
in the Introductory Note, p. 43, only observing that +si+ has its usual
meaning of _if_, and +impedītos+, _when they should get stuck fast_,
agrees with +hostes+ understood.

2. +ut ... adgrederentur+: expresses the purpose of +parāti in armis
erant+.

9. +eo cōnsilio+: _with this design_; explained by +ut castellum ...
expūgnārent+.

+possent+: they said to themselves, _if we shall be able_, +poterimus+;
_but if we shall not have succeeded_, +si minus potuerimus+; hence
+potuissent+, when related. See note on +īnstrūxisset+, p. 27, l. 24.

12. +nōbis ūsui+: compare +subsidio oppidānis+, p. 26, l. 32.


CHAP. 10,

line 3. +pūgnātum est+: contains its own subject, _there was fierce
fighting_. See +contendēbātur+, chap. 9, l. 3, and note.

4. +impedītos+: _while they were struggling_.

6. +circumventos interfēcērunt+: _they surrounded and killed_. Read
again the note on +ēductas īnstrūxerant+, chap. 8, l. 17.

7. +spem+: subject-accusative of +fefellisse+; but translate, _that they
were disappointed in the hope_.

+neque+: take the negative part with +prōgredi+.

8. +ipsos+: that is, +se ipsos+, namely, +hostes+.

10. +quemque+: subject-accusative of +reverti+. See also note on chap.
4, l. 9.

11. +quōrum ... ad eos+: you will very often find the relative clause
preceding the antecedent. In almost all such cases the English way of
speaking requires us to render the antecedent clause first.

13. +Quod+: _this_, referring to the last two sentences.

+eo cōnsilio+: _with this design_, explained by the following clause.

16. +Hīs persuādēri+: depends on +nōn poterat+. Why did not Cæsar write,
+Hi persuādēri ... nōn poterant+, since he means, _these could not be
persuaded_? 230; H. 301, 1.

PAGE 28,

19. +reliquos ... cōnantes+: _the rest ... while they were trying_.

21. +Hostes+: subject of +cōnstituērunt+, l. 25, while a pronoun
referring to +hostes+ may be mentally supplied as subject of
+intellēxērunt+ and +vīdērunt+. This sentence illustrates an important
principle of Latin order, attention to which will be of great aid in
translation. When the verb of the principal clause and that of the
dependent clause have the same subject, it is commonly expressed in the
principal, and left out in the dependent, clause. In English we do the
opposite. We often begin with the dependent clause; the Latin _frames it
into_ the principal clause.

21. +ubi+: repeat mentally with +vīdērunt+ and +coepit+.

28. +ad eos dēfendendos+: illustrates a very common way of expressing a
purpose.


CHAP. 11,

line 1. +ea re+: that is, to disperse to their homes; chap. 10, l. 10.

2. +ēgressi+: the subject is +Belgae+, understood.

3. +cōnsimilis+: _altogether like._ What is the force of +con+?

4. +Caesar+: as the subject of +veritus+ and +continuit+, +Caesar+ seems
strangely placed in the grip of the ablative absolute; but the position
shows by whom the knowledge was got. _Caesar getting wind of this
movement immediately through his spies_.

5. +veritus+: try always to render a participle so as to show its
logical relation to the main verb, whether of time, cause, contrast,
or what not; here, _because he feared_.

+castris+: substantially equivalent to +in castris+.

6. +qui ... morārētur+: compare +qui dēdūceret+, chap. 2, l. 3, and
note.

10. +ventum erat+: _they had come._ Compare +sustentātum est+, chap. 6,
l. 3; +contendēbātur+, chap. 9, l. 3.

11. +priōres+: _those in advance_.

15. +sub+: _towards._ The idea of _place_ being transferred to that of
time.

PAGE 29,

5. +quisque+: see p. 25, l. 3, and note on simplified text.

+prīmum itineris locum+: _the first place on the road_.

8. +qua ... discēderent+: following +quod ... perspēxerat+.

16. +cum ... cōnsisterent+: _since the enemy, at the very extremity of
the rear, kept making a stand_.

18. +priōres+: +et+ understood; _while those in advance_.

+quod+: carry on also into the next clause; _and because they were not
held together_ (+continērentur+).

21. +sine ūllo perīculo+: two ways of expressing “without any” in this
chapter; for above we have +nūllo certo ōrdine+, _without any definite
order_.

23. +quantum ... spatium+: _how great a space of time_ (+diēi+) _there
was_; that is (they killed as great a number) _as the length of the time
allowed_.

24. +sēque in castra ... recēpērunt+: and they and their pitiless
commander probably slept well that night.


CHAP. 12,

line 3. +ex itinere+: see chap. 6, l. 2, and note.

+oppūgnāre+: means here _carry by assault_.

5. +omnis ... multitūdo+: notice that an adjective and a noun are often
separated by words depending on the noun. Here +ex fuga+ from the
position is almost equivalent to +fugientium+.

6. +vīneis+: wooden frames with sloping roof and covered with hides, to
protect a number of besiegers.

7. +āctis+: from +ago+, _brought up_; the +vīneae+ were often moved on
wheels.

+aggere iacto+: _when earth had been thrown up for a mound_. This was
done so that wooden towers could be brought up near the walls.

10. +ut cōnservārentur+: mark how often a dependent clause precedes the
one on which it depends. Attention to this will often help in
unravelling a long sentence. Now see +qui ... dēdūceret+, chap. 2, l. 3;
+quid ... posset et ... audērent+, chap. 8, ll. 3, 4; +qui ...
morārētur+, chap. 11, l. 6.

PAGE 29,

32. +paucis dēfendentibus+: _though the defenders were few_.

PAGE 30,

1. +Castris mūnītis+: _after making a fortified camp._ The first and
most important thing, after selecting the site of a camp, was to
intrench it. That may be all that is meant in this instance.

+vīneas agere+: depends on +coepit+.

+quaeque ... comparāre+: _and to get ready whatever_.

2. +ūsui+: compare +subsidio+, p. 26, l. 32.

5. +quae+: _the like of which_.


CHAP. 13,

line 1. +obsidibus acceptis+: _after receiving hostages_.

+armis ... trāditis+: it was Cæsar’s practice to disarm his conquered
enemies.

3. +Qui cum+: the relative is in the right place in Latin, but we cannot
translate in this order. The natural place for both words is at the
beginning of a clause; but when they come together, the relative takes
precedence.

5. +circiter ... quīnque+: _only about five miles_.

6. +abesset+: governed by +cum+.

+māiōres nātu+: _elders_; +seniōres+ would not do.

7. +sēse ... venīre+: _they surrendered to him unconditionally_.

9. +pueri+: _children_, as +homines+ often means _men and women_.

PAGE 30,

9. +atque+: _and besides_, or _and in particular_.

17. +neque ... contendere+: _and that they were not in arms_.

20. +passis manibus+: pitiful!


CHAP. 14,

line 1. +facit verba+: _intercedes_.

2. +in fide ... fuērunt+: _have been faithful and friendly_.

4. +perferre+: _were enduring._ For the tense, see 336, A.

5. +ēius cōnsili prīncipes+: _the prime movers in this plan_:
+prīncipes+ = +auctōres+, _authors_.

6. +in Britanniam profūgērunt+: as lately Boulanger and others have
done.

8. +clēmentia+: said of one who has power to exercise the opposite,
+sevēritas+, +crūdēlitas+.

+mānsuētūdine+: said of one who is humane and gentle, opposed to
+feritas+.

9. +fēceris ... amplificābis+: we say, ‘if you do this, you will add
to’; in Latin, ‘if you shall have done this, you will add to.’

10. +qua+: 105, d.; H. 190, 1.

+si qua bella+, etc.: _by whose aid and resources they_ (the Ædui) _are
accustomed to bear the burden of whatever wars befall them_.

PAGE 30,

26. +perferre ... dēfēcisse+: _were enduring ... had revolted_.

28. +quod intellegerent+: _seeing_.

31. +sua+: emphatic; _his own_, that is, _his well-known_.

32. +quod si fēcerit+: _if he should do this_; the subjunctive of the
future perfect, for which there is no separate form; hence the form of
the perfect subjunctive is borrowed. If the tense is named by its form,
it will be called _perfect subjunctive_; if by its meaning, _future
perfect subjunctive_.

PAGE 31,

1. +amplificātūrum (esse)+: the subject must be inferred from the
subject of +fēcerit+.


CHAP. 15,

line 1. +honōris ... causa+: _out of regard to Divitiacus_.

3. +māgna ... auctōritāte+: _one of great influence_; a predicate
ablative of description; such an ablative must always have a modifier,
as here, +māgna+. The genitive may be used in the same way, as below,
+māgnae virtūtis+. On the order, see note, chap. 12, l. 5.

6. +quōrum+, etc.: translate closely in the order of the Latin; _about
their character and customs, Cæsar, on inquiry_; so, generally, do your
best to keep close to the Latin order. Read again the Introductory Note,
p. 43.

12. +qui ... dēdissent+: _for having surrendered_; what would be the
meaning of +qui ... dēdiderant+?

PAGE 31,

6. +hominum ... praestābat+: _was the most populous_; what is it
literally?

12. +pati+: _that they permitted._ Supply +eos+, referring to +Nervii+,
as the subject of +pati+, +esse+, +increpitāre+, and +cōnfirmāre+.

13. +quod ... exīstimārent+: observe in the simplified text +quod ...
exīstimābant+; why the difference?

16. +qui ... dēdissent ... prōiēcissent+: _for having surrendered and
renounced_; literally, _since they had surrendered_.

17. +sēse+: subject-accusative of +mīssūros+.


CHAP. 16,

line 1. +trīduum+: _for three days_, accusative of duration.

2. +Sabim+: now called the Sambre.

6. +quīque+: equivalent to +et eos qui+, _and all such as_.

+per aetātem+: _by reason of their age_; that is, whether too old or too
young.

7. +in eum locum ... quo+: _into a place to which._ The idea of the
Latin fully expressed would be, _into a place of such a character_
(+eum+) _that to it_ (+quo+) _there would be no access for an army_.
319, 2 and note; H. 500, I. Compare +qui ... vidērentur+, immediately
preceding.

8. +exercitui+: _for an army_, not necessarily, _for Cæsar’s army_.

PAGE 31,

19. +Cum ... fēcisset+: a temporal +cum+ clause is not always best
rendered by _when_, etc.: _after marching for three days_.

24. +hīs ... persuāserant+: observe on p. 29, l. 1, an example of the
impersonal construction of +persuādeo+ in the passive: +hīs persuādēri
... nōn poterat+, _it was not possible for these to be persuaded_.

27. +cōniēcisse+: the verb implies hurried action, and so differs from
+dēpōno+, which Cæsar uses in Book IV., 19, of putting women and
children in a place of safety.


CHAP. 17,

line 2. +qui ... dēligant+: compare +qui dēdūceret+, chap. 2, l. 3, and
note; +qui ... morārētur+, chap. 11, l. 6.

+Cum+: _since._ See note on chap. 6, l. 8.

5. +dēmōnstrārunt+: shortened from +dēmōnstrāvērunt+, 128, a, 1; H. 235.

+inter singulas+: _between each two_; the same mistake, “between each,”
is common in English.

6. +neque ... negōti+: _and it was a matter of no difficulty at all_.

7. +cum ... vēnisset+: _when the first legion should reach the camping
ground._ In the direct form, +vēnerit+, _shall have reached_; then
regularly such a future perfect is changed to the pluperfect subjunctive
in indirect discourse after a past tense. See note on chap 9, l. 10.

8. +sarcinis+: “Besides his arms, the Roman soldier carried stakes
(+vālli+), used for the palisades of the camp, food and utensils, a saw,
a spade, a chain for his prisoners, and other things. He was loaded like
a mule.” --LONG.

+qua pulsa+: _if this legion were beaten_.

+futūrum (esse)+: depends on +dēmōnstrārunt+; _the result would be_.

9. +Nervii autem+: _now the Nervii._ +Nervii+ is the subject of
+effēcerant+. This long sentence is not so difficult as it at first
seems. Follow closely the Latin order to discover the sense, render
+quo+ _in order that_, +effēcerant+ _had caused_, and +īnstar+ _like_.

11. +teneris ... ēnātis+: _by lopping the trees when young, and
intertwining the branches which grew out thick in a lateral direction_;
+ēnātis+ from +ēnāscor+.

12. +interiectis+: it does not appear possible to take this word in
the sense given to it in the dictionaries, _thrown or stuffed in_. So
Moberly translates, “by throwing in brambles and thorns for the present
occasion.” But is it to be supposed that this was done everywhere? If
not, how would the Nervii know where to do it? Moreover, what they had
done was done +antīquitus+, _from of old_. Translate, therefore, _by
planting among them_.

14. +quo nōn modo nōn ... sed ne ... quidem+: this formula, or (without
second +nōn+) +nōn modo ... sed ne ... quidem+, is usually awkwardly
rendered, _not only not, but not even_. Instead, translate as if the
first member were complete in itself (suppressing +modo+), followed by
_nay, nor even_, thus: _which it was not possible to pass through, nay,
nor even see through_.

15. +Hīs rēbus+: _by these obstacles_.

16. +nōn ... cōnsilium+: _they ought not to disregard the advice_.

PAGE 32,

4. +impedīmentōrum+: here, _baggage animals_; +impedīmentis+, below,
_baggage_.

9. +Adiuvābat+: the subject is the long sentence following, +Nervii ...
effēcerant+. Translate, _this circumstance favored the advice of those
who reported the intelligence, that_ (+quod+).

10. +nihil ... possent+: compare +quid in bello possent+, p. 24, l. 25;
+quid virtūte posset+, p. 27, l. 12.

11. +neque enim+: _and in fact ... not._ Observe that +enim+ here does
not mean _for_.

12. +pedestribus valent cōpiis+: compare +virtūte ... valēre+, p. 25,
l. 5. The ablative is ablative of means.

13. +ad eos+: that is, the Nervii.


CHAP. 18,

line 1. +quem locum+: _I mean the place which_.

3. +Ab eo flūmine+: that is, on the other side.

4. +pari adclīvitāte collis+: _a hill of similar upward slope_;
a descriptive ablative.

+ab superiōre parte+: _in the upper part._ +Ab+ not seldom means _on,
in, at, by_, because the idea of removal (_from_) implies previous
contact or nearness, and the latent idea is sometimes the most
important.

5. +ut+: may be considered as referring to an +ita+ suppressed with
+silvestris+; _so thickly wooded that_.

+nōn ... posset+: _one could not easily see within._ Impersonal
expressions, like +perspici potest+, are common in Latin. Mark the mode
of translation.

7. +secundum+: _along_, properly _following_, from +sequor+.

PAGE 32,

24. +adversus huic et contrārius+: _corresponding to this and right
opposite_.

25. +passus ... apertus+: _clear of woods for about two hundred paces up
from its base_.

+īnfimus+: +ab īnferiōre parte+.


CHAP. 19,

line 1. +omnibus cōpiis+: Cæsar often uses +cum omnibus cōpiis+.

2. +cōnsuētūdine+: _according to custom_; just as frequently +ex
cōnsuētūdine+.

4. +conlocārat+: for +conlocāverat+. See +dēmōnstrārunt+, chap. 17,
l. 5, and note.

6. +praesidiōque impedīmentis+: compare +subsidio oppidānis+, chap. 7,
l. 2, and note.

11. +opere dīmēnso+: _after laying out the work_; the expression refers
to marking off the ground preparatory to trenching, making a rampart,
etc.

+castra mūnīre+: _to make a camp_.

17. +in manibus nostris+: _close upon us_.

18. +ad+: _towards_; repeat it mentally before +eos+.

+adverso colle+: _straight up the hill_; literally, _with the hill
before them_; so perhaps strictly neither an ablative absolute nor an
ablative of the “way by which.”

PAGE 32,

32. +ratio ōrdōque āgminis+: _the plan and the order of marching_.

+aliter ... āc+: _otherwise than, different from what_; this strange
idiom looks like an abridged, colloquial expression; probably it was,
fully expressed, +aliter āc aliter+, _one way and another way_. The
order of march was one way and the Belgæ had reported it another way.
So I have heard a child say, “This is different and that is different,”
meaning “this is different from that.”

PAGE 33,

8. +cum+: _while_; to be repeated mentally with +facerent+.

10. +neque ... cēdentes īnsequi audērent+: _and while our men were
hesitating to pursue them when they retreated_.

+quem ad fīnem+: translate as if it were +ad fīnem ad quem+, _to the
line to which the level, clear ground extended_.

15. +ut ... cōnfirmāverant+: _as they had arranged their order of battle
and ranks within the woods, and as they had encouraged each other
to do_.


CHAP. 20,

line 2. +sīgnum tuba dandum (erat)+: in order to call the men to take
their places in the ranks. Some might not see the flag.

3. +sīgnum dandum+: this time the signal is for the charge, or perhaps
to get ready for a charge.

5. +subsidio+: dative of end or service, but render as if a nominative,
which might have been used, _a help_.

7. +commode+: modifies +praescrībere+.

+ipsi sibi praescrībere ... poterant+: they could _direct themselves
without any orders_ (+ipsi+).

11. +nihil+: _not ... at all_; stronger than +nōn+.

12. +per se+: _on their own responsibility_.

+quae vidēbantur+: _whatever seemed best_.

PAGE 33,

27. +qui+: does not refer to +mīlites+, but to +ii+ understood.

+aggeris petendi causa+: _for the purpose of seeking materials for a
rampart_. Mark the position of +causa+, always following the genitive
depending on it.

30. +hīs difficultātibus+: _in this strait_; but the words are in the
dative with +subsidio+. Find two other instances of this construction of
two datives.

32. +quid fieri oportēret+: the object of +praescrībere+.


CHAP. 21,

line 1. +necessāriis rēbus imperātis+: when you meet with +res+, ask
yourself exactly what it means, and then find a proper rendering.
Translate, _after giving the necessary orders_.

4. +prīstinae+: this word is often used of what was formerly and still
continues.

+neu ... animo+: _and not lose presence of mind_.

6. +quod ... aberant+: gives the reason of the following, not the
preceding, clause.

8. +pūgnantibus occurrit+: _he finds them fighting_.

8. +Temporis+: mark how the important word comes first. Take this
sentence in thought almost without change in the order of the words,
then translate.

+tanta ... exiguitas+: _so great was the littleness_ = _such was the
shortness_. Translate, _so short was the time_.

10. +īnsīgnia+: “the crests, feathers red and black, and other
decorations which the soldiers had.... On the march the helmet was not
carried on the head. The shields had leather coverings when they were
not in use.” --LONG.

12. +Quam ... dēvēnit+: _to whatever part of the army each one happened
to come_.

+ab opere+: that is, making the camp; see chap. 19, l. 11.

13. +quaeque ... cōnspēxit+: _and whatever standards he caught sight of
first_.

PAGE 34,

13. +quo ... posset+: _whither a javelin could be hurled_ = _a javelin
throw_.

19. +Quam ... in partem+: compare the second line of the chapter.
+quisque+ seems oddly placed, but it is crowded out of the first place,
where it would like to stand, by +quam+.


CHAP. 22,

line 2. +rei mīlitāris ... ōrdo+: _military science and arrangement_.

3. +fiēbat+: _the result was_.

+aliae ... parte+: in this idiom the second part only of the thought is
expressed. ‘_Other legions were fighting in another part_’ implies ‘some
were fighting in one part of the field.’ So +claudus altero pede+, _lame
in the other foot_, implies one foot sound.

5. +interiectis+: to be taken with +saepibus+.

6. +ut+: _so that_. +conlocāri+: depends on +possent+.

7. +in+: of reason, _because of_ or _owing to_.

8. +inīquitāte+: usually translated _unfavorable condition_, or by some
similar phrase, and such is the common meaning of +inīquitas+; but the
context shows that the meaning here is closer to the original sense,
that of _unevenness_; hence we may translate, _owing to such inequality
in the condition of things_.

PAGE 34,

25. +cum+: _since_, governs +impedīrētur+ as well as +resisterent+.

+dīversis legiōnibus+: +dīversus+ means _turned different ways, not with
united line_; hence here, _disjoined_. Translate, _since, owing to the
legions being separated_.

28. +neque certa subsidia+: here begins the statement of the result;
+certa subsidia+: subject of +poterant+.

+neque quid+, etc.: _nor was it possible to foresee what was needed
everywhere_. After +prōvidēri+ supply mentally +poterat+, of which the
whole preceding clause is the grammatical subject.


CHAP. 23,

line 1. +ut+: _since_. Would the mode of +cōnstiterant+ have been the
same, if +cum+ had been used in place of +ut+?

2. +acie+: an old form of the genitive for +aciēi+.

+Atrebates+: object of +compulērunt+.

6. +Ipsi+: refers to the subject of +interfēcērunt+; that is, +legiōnis
nōnae et decimae mīlites+.

8. +dīversae+ = +aliae+; what should it mean from its derivation?

10. +a frōnte+: _along the front_. See chap. 18, l. 4, and note.

11. +ab sinistra parte+: _on the left_. Compare +ā frōnte+, preceding
line, and +ab superiōre parte+, chap. 18, l. 4, and note.

+nūdātis castris+: _as the camp was left unguarded_.

13. +aperto latere+: _on their_ (the legions’) _exposed flank_.

14. +summum ... locum+: _the summit occupied by the camp_; +castrōrum+
is a possessive genitive.

PAGE 35,

3. +exanimātos ... cōnfectos+: _breathless and exhausted by wounds_.

+hīs+: the ninth and tenth legions.

4. +ea pars+: that is, +ea pars hostium+.

5. +cōnantes+: accusative, agreeing with +Atrebates+ understood, or a
pronoun referring to Atrebates.

8. +resistentes hostes+: object of +cōniēcērunt+.

16. +summam imperi+: _chief command_.


CHAP. 24,

line 2. +cum ... reciperent+: _as they were returning_.

5. +cum respēxissent+: _on looking back_. A +cum+ clause is not always
best translated by a full clause.

6. +praecipites ... mandābant+: _ran away as fast as they could._ What
literally?

7. +eōrum+: depends on +clāmor fremitusque+.

8. +ferēbantur+: _began to rush._ Observe the imperfects followed by
perfects. The imperfect paints, the perfect describes.

10. +auxili causa+: _for the purpose of rendering aid_ = _as
auxiliaries_.

11. +cum+: _since._ See note, chap. 6, l. 8.

+complēri+: this and the following infinitives depend on +vīdissent+.

13. +vīdissent+: the subject is +equites Trēveri+.

14. +rēbus+: _fortunes._ How might a clause be substituted here in Latin
for the ablative absolute?

15. +pulsos superātōsque+: supply +esse+.

PAGE 35,

21. +pulsos+: supply +esse+.

22. +adversis hostibus occurrēbant+: _came straight against the enemy._
What literally?

23. +cālōnes ... āc summo iugo+: the +porta decumāna+ was the rear gate
of the camp, opposite the +porta praetōria+. It appears from this
passage that the place for the +cālōnes+ was at the back of the camp,
and that in this instance the camp was partly on sloping ground.

30. +virtūtis opīnio+: _reputation for valor_.

PAGE 36,

2. +dīversos dissipātōsque+: _running in different directions and
scattered_.

5. +hostes+: subject-accusative of +potītos (esse)+.


CHAP. 25,

line 2. +suos urgēri+: _that his men were hard pressed_; the infinitive
depends on +vīdit+.

3. +cōnfertos mīlites+: _that the soldiers by being crowded together_.

+sibi ... impedīmento+: _hindered one another_.

8. +ut ... posset+: _so that he could no longer stand_.

9. +Hīs rēbus+: _for these reasons_.

+tardiōres+: _were losing heart_.

12. +subeuntes intermittere+: _cease mounting the hill_.

12. +ab utrōque latere+: _on both flanks._ Compare +ab superiōre parte+,
chap. 18, l. 4.

13. +rem ... angusto+: _that the situation was critical._ What
literally?

14. +ūni+: a peculiar use of +ūnus+, quite equivalent to _a_; not to be
imitated in writing Latin.

17. +sīgna ... iūssit+: _he ordered them to advance and at the same time
to open out their ranks_.

PAGE 36,

7. +Caesar+: subject of +prōcessit+, fifteen lines below. This first
sentence extending through eighteen lines looks very formidable; but if
it is taken in accordance with the Introductory Note, p. 43, the meaning
will be evident. To translate the sentence is more difficult. In
translating, repeat “_and saw_” before the words +quartae cohortis+, and
render the ablative absolutes by clauses, thus: _and saw that all the
captains of the fourth cohort were killed_. Then, +reliquos esse
tardiōres+, _that the rest_ (in consequence) _were losing heart_.

8. +sīgnīsque ... conlātis+: _and since the standards were brought
together._ Try constantly to make out the relation in thought expressed
by participles; that is, whether the idea is that of time, _when,
while_, etc.; of cause, _as, since_; of concession, _though,
notwithstanding_; or of condition, accompanying circumstances, etc., to
be variously rendered.

16. +ab novissimis+: _in the rear_. So below, l. 21. Compare +ab
sinistra parte+, p. 35, l. 13. In both places in this chapter it would
be easy to make the mistake of taking +ab+ in the sense of +ex+, as a
substitute for the partitive genitive.

27. +operam nāvāre cuperet+: “_wished to do his best_.” What literally?


CHAP. 26,

line 3. +ut ... coniungerent+: _for the legions gradually to draw
together_.

7. +proelio nūntiāto+: _on the report of the battle_.

+cursu incitāto+: _quickening their speed._ The participle following is
causal; they began to run because of the report of the battle.

10. +qui+: refers to +decimam legiōnem+. What is the grammatical
irregularity, and how is it to be accounted for?

+cum+: to be taken with +cōgnōvissent+.

+quo in loco res esset+: _what the situation was._ What literally?
Account for the subjunctive.

12. +nihil ... fēcērunt+: _left nothing undone in the way of speed_.
What literally?

+reliqui+: neuter of +reliquus+. A partitive genitive depending on
+nihil+. Find a similar construction in chap. 15.

PAGE 36,

31. +conversa sīgna+: the object of +īnferrent+, but most conveniently
rendered as coördinate with it, _to face about and charge_. It is
thought that by this movement the twelfth and the seventh legions formed
a circle or a square.

PAGE 37,

1. +neque timērent+: repeat +cum+ mentally from the preceding clause;
_and since they_ (no longer) _feared_.

+āversi+: literally, _being turned away_; translate, _from their rear
being unguarded_.


CHAP. 27,

line 2. +vulneribus cōnfecti+: _badly wounded._ What literally?

+prōcubuissent+: from +prōcumbo+.

3. +vēro+: emphasizes +equites+, but is better left untranslated; say,
_while the cavalry_.

4. +se ... praeferrent+: _thrust themselves before_; a result clause,
dependent on +tanta ... est facta+.

5. +in extrēma spe salūtis+: “_when all hope of saving themselves was at
an end_.” Here a literal translation would be meaningless or misleading.

7. +proximi ... īnsistēbant+: _those nearest would stand upon their
prostrate companions_.

8. +hīs deiēctis+: _when these_ (in turn) _were thrown down_.

10. +intercepta remittēbant+: _would catch and hurl back._ See +ēductas
īnstrūxerant+, chap. 8, l. 17, and note.

11. +ut+, etc.: _so that one ought to judge that it was not without
cause that men of such valor._ On +iūdicāre dēbēret+, compare +perspici
posset+, chap. 18, l. 5, and note.

13. +quae ... difficillimis+: _things which, most difficult in
themselves_.

+facilia+: a predicate adjective with +redēgerat+.

PAGE 37,

15. +innīxi+: from +innītor+, agrees with +nostri+.

+perterritos+: supply +esse+; the subject-accusative is +hostes+.

16. +inermes+: agrees with +cālōnes+, _even though unarmed_.

23. +qui superessent+: _the survivors._ Supply +ii+ as antecedent of
+qui+.

+ut+: _as_. So used p. 34, l. 23.

24. +cōnicerent+: dependent on +tantam virtutem ... ut+; (so that)
_those who survived_ (+qui superessent+) _kept hurling_.


CHAP. 28,

line 1. +prope+: modifies +ad+, not +redācto+.

2. +redācto+: see the last word of the preceding chapter.

+māiōres nātu+: see chap. 13, l. 6, and note.

3. +pueris+: see chap. 13, l. 9, and note.

4. +cōnsēnsu ... supererant+: _with the consent of all the survivors_.

7. +vix ad+: _to barely_; for +ad vix+, as some say.

8. +in+: _towards_; +erga+ might have been used.

9. +vidērētur+: not _that he might seem_, but _that he might be seen_.

11. +se ... prohibērent+: _refrain and keep their dependents from_;
+prohibēre+ is appropriate to +suos+, but hardly to +se+.

PAGE 37,

31. +aestuāria+: “the country lying to the north (the modern Zealand) is
low and marshy, cut up with tidewater inlets and bays.” --ALLEN &
GREENOUGH.

32. +cum vīctōribus+, etc.: _since they thought there was no obstacle
for the victors, no safety for the vanquished_.

PAGE 38,

4. +mīlibus LX.+: they had promised fifty thousand; see chap. 4. It was
natural that they should exaggerate their losses.


CHAP. 29,

line 1. +auxilio Nerviis+: compare +subsidio oppidānis+, chap. 7, l. 2,
and note. Find other examples of this construction.

4. +ūnum oppidum+: supposed to be at the junction of the Sambre and
Meuse.

5. +ex omnibus in circuitu partibus+: simply, _all round_.

9. +conlocābant+: there is a reading, +conlocārant+. If that is the true
reading, +tum+ in the preceding line would mean _besides_.

PAGE 38,

10. +cum+: _while._ Four lines below +cum+ means _though_.

16. +aditus ... pedum+: _an approach of two hundred feet in breadth, not
more_; +pedum+ depends on +aditus+.

21. +iis impedīmentis+: take with +dēpositis+, two lines below.

22. +agere āc portāre+: _drive or carry_.

24. +ūna+: _with it_; that is, the plunder.

25. +cum alias+, etc.: _since they carried on now aggressive now
defensive war._ What literally?


CHAP. 30,

line 1. +prīmo adventu+ = +cum prīmum advēnisset+, _as soon as our army
had got there_.

3. +pedum XII.+: that is, +in altitūdinem+, which is expressed, chap. 5,
l. 19.

4. +oppido+: might have been +in oppido+. Cf. +castris+, chap. 11, l. 5.

5. +vīneis āctis+: +āctis+ from +ago+; see chap. 12, l. 6, and note.

+aggere exstrūcto+: an embankment of timber, stones, and earth was begun
at a distance from the walls of a town, wide enough to roll one or more
towers upon, and was carried forward by soldiers working under the
shelter of the +vīneae+ up to the defensive works.

6. +cōnstitui+: _being raised_.

7. +ab tanto spatio+: _so far away._ Compare +ab mīlibus+, chap. 7,
l. 6, and note.

8. +quibusnam manibus+: _with what hands, pray_; +nam+ added for
emphasis, to point their sarcasm.

10. +conlocāre+: strangely used for +conlocātūros (esse)+. The Aduatuci
may have thought that the Romans intended to hoist the tower upon their
wall, or they may have been joking. Which is more likely?

PAGE 39,

5. +hominibus ... contemptui+: another pair of datives. Find other
examples. The Italians of the present time do not strike one as
conspicuously shorter than the Germans.

+māgnitūdine+: being contrasted with +brevitas+, is used in the sense
of +altitūdine+.


CHAP. 31,

line 1. +movēri+: _moving._ This word here has suggested a change of
+conlocāre+, in the last line of the preceding chapter, to +mōtūros+, a
very plausible conjecture, but it spoils the joke of the Aduatuci.

5. +qui+: _since they._ Compare +qui ... dēdidissent+, chap. 15, l. 12,
and note.

8. +pro sua clēmentia+: _according to his well-known clemency_. See
chap. 14, l. 8, and note. What did they think of his clemency when he
sold 53,000 of them into slavery?

11. +trāditis armis+ = +si arma trādidissent+, _if they should surrender
their arms_.

13. +per cruciātum interfici+: _to be tortured to death._ What
literally?

PAGE 39,

16. +statuisset+: not _had decided_, but _should decide_. No mistake is
oftener made by beginners than in the rendering of a pluperfect
subjunctive of indirect discourse representing a future perfect of
direct discourse. Such a subjunctive is to be rendered by the auxiliary
_should_, not _had_. To tell whether a pluperfect subjunctive represents
a future perfect, think what form a speaker’s words would take,
remembering that the Romans commonly used the future or future perfect
of things really future, while we very often use the present.


CHAP. 32,

line 1. +cōnsuētūdine+: ablative of cause.

3. +aries+: “a long, strong beam of wood, furnished with an iron head in
the form of a ram’s head. It was suspended from a framework by a strong
chain or ropes, and worked by men, who drove it against the wall.”
--LONG.

4. +in Nerviis+: _in the case of the Nervii_; a common meaning of +in+
with names of persons.

5. +ne quam ... īnferant+: _not to do any harm to those who had
surrendered to the Roman people_.

7. +facere+: one would expect the future with subject-accusative, +se
factūros (esse)+. Compare +conlocāre+, for +conlocātūros esse+, chap.
30, l. 10.

9. +prope ... adaequārent+: _came up almost to the very top_; +summam+
with +altitūdinem+. What literally?

12. +pāce sunt ūsi+ = +conquiēvērunt+, _kept quiet_.


CHAP. 33,

line 3. +nostros+: _our commanders_, subject-accusative of +dēductūros+
and +servātūros (esse)+.

+praesidia+: men stationed in the +castella+; see below.

4. +dēductūros ... servātūros+: observe how frequently +esse+ is omitted
with the future participle.

+dēnique+: _at any rate._ What is its usual meaning?

5. +tertia vigilia+: the Romans divided the night into four equal
divisions, watches, of about three hours each.

9. +eo concursum est+: _the soldiers hurried thither._ What literally?
Find similar constructions in chaps. 6, 9, 10, 11.

10. +in extrēma spe salūtis+: compare chap. 27, l. 5, and note. The
context shows, however, that the meaning is not quite the same here.
Translate, _as their last chance of saving themselves_.

14. +nēmo+: observe the emphasis from its position. Compare in English,
“Silver and gold have I none.” +nēmo+ and +nūllus+ are often so placed.
Cf. +nūlli+, chap. 6, l. 10.

16. +ab iis qui ēmerant+ = +ab emptōribus+: _by the purchasers_, who
were the +mercātōres+, traders who followed the army as hungry sharks
follow a ship.

+capitum+: we say “souls.” It depends on +quīnquāginta trium+.

17. +quīnquāginta trium+: 53,000 captives, probably chained in gangs and
sent to be sold in the Province and in Italy; a source of great gain to
the general.

PAGE 40,

4. +mīlites ... mīlitibus+: another evidence of haste. See p. 26, l. 19,
and note.

5. +ne quam ... iniūriam+: see p. 39, l. 28, and note.

9. +iis+: with +armis+. Observe the order of the words.

10. +vīminibus intextis+: repeat mentally +ex+ before these words. Some
supply +factis+.

16. +pūgnātumque+, etc.: translate as if +hostibus+ and +viris+ were
subjects.

17. +ut ... dēbuit+: _as brave men ought to fight._ What literally?

18. +iacerent+: the subjunctive shows that the remark is a general one.
The indicative would have a limiting force. The difference can hardly be
brought out in translation. In the former case we may render, _against
men who could throw_; in the latter, _against those who were throwing_.

20. +ad+ = +circiter+.


CHAP. 34,

line 2. +mīserat+: _had sent_, that is, before the defeat of the
Aduatuci.

5. +diciōnem+: _under the sway_; in some texts, +in dēditiōnem+. If that
reading is correct, the meaning would be, _were brought to surrender_.


CHAP. 35,

line 1. +pācāta+: see p. 23, l. 7, and note.

4. +qui ... pollicērentur+: compare p. 23, l. 19, +qui ... dēdūceret+;
p. 29, l. 12, +qui ... morārētur+; p. 31, l. 30, +qui ... dēligant+.

6. +inita proxima aestāte+: see p. 23, l. 18, and note.

10. +ex litteris+: _in consequence of the letters_.

11. +supplicātio+: a public, religious festival of thanksgiving, decreed
by the senate. “The fifteen days’ rejoicing marks the constant fear of
the Gauls which had haunted the Romans ever since the ‘dies Alliensis.’
Kraner remarks that the longest ‘supplicatio’ till this had been one of
twelve days, for Pompeius’ success against Mithridates.” --MOBERLY.

+nūlli+: see p. 40, l. 22; also p. 26, l. 24, and note.




EXERCISES ON SIMPLIFIED TEXT.

The references are to the Grammars of Allen and Greenough, and Harkness.

The learner is expected, before writing the Exercises, to review the
Latin text, and find therein and commit to memory illustrations of the
grammatical principles selected.


CHAPTER I.

  1. Indirect Discourse: 336, 1 and 2; H. 523 and I.
  2. +Cum+ Temporal with Subjunctive: 325; H. 521, II. and 2.
  3. Subjunctive after Verbs of Fearing: 331, f.; H. 498, III.

1. Cæsar was in hither Gaul.

2. Reports were brought into hither Gaul.

3. While Labienus was in Gaul, the Belgæ made a league.[1]

4. A report is brought that[2] the Belgæ are conspiring.

5. They are afraid that our army is coming[3] against them.

6. They are vexed[4] that our army remains in Gaul.

7. Cæsar feared that the Belgæ were conspiring.

8. Letters kept coming,[5] while they were conspiring.

    [NOTES.--
    1. made a league: one word in Latin.
    2. Be careful about the _that_ clause in this and the following
    sentence. Recall the text to memory and mentally apply the rules.
    3. is coming: use +venio+.
    4. are vexed: in Latin one of the expressions, like +rūmōres
    adferēbantur+, requiring the accusative and infinitive.
    5. kept coming: one word in Latin.]


CHAPTER II.

  1. Relative Clauses of Purpose: 317, 2 and N.; H. 497, I.
  2. Accus. and Infin. of Indirect Discourse: 336, 1 and 2; H. 523
    and I.

1. In hither Gaul there[1] were two legions.

2. Two new legions Cæsar levies.

3. The two new legions are sent into the interior of Gaul.

4. Cæsar sends his lieutenant to lead[2] them.[3]

5. Pedius was sent to lead the new legions.

6. The Senones report that the Belgians are gathering.[4]

7. The Senones informed Cæsar about the Belgians.

    [NOTES.--
    1. there: omit.
    2. to lead; do not express a purpose in Latin by the infinitive.
    3. them: +eas+.
    4. are gathering: a passive form in Latin, because the sense is,
    _are being collected together_.]


CHAPTER III.

  1. Ablative of Means: 248, 8, c; H. 420.
  2. Ablative with +potior+, +ūtor+, etc.: 249; H. 421, I.
  3. Accus. and Infin. of Indirect Discourse: 336, 2; H. 523, I.

1. Cæsar came unexpectedly to the borders of the Remi.

2. The Remi said they had not combined[1] against the Roman people.

3. They said they were ready to give hostages.

4. All the rest of the Belgæ[2] had joined[3] with the Germans.

5. They aided Cæsar with corn and other[4] things.

6. The Remi and their[5] kinsmen enjoy the same laws.

    [NOTES.--
    1. they had not combined: _themselves not to have combined_.
    2. of the Belgæ: not the genitive.
    3. had joined: in Latin, _had joined themselves_, if you use
    +coniungo+.
    4. +aliis+.
    5. their: omit.]


CHAPTER IV.

  1. Indirect Questions: 334; H. 529, 1.
  2. Substantive Clauses of Result: 332; H. 501.

1. Whence[1] did very many of the Belgæ[2] spring?

2. Cæsar asked whence very many of the Belgæ sprung.

3. What states are in arms?

4. Cæsar asked what states were in arms.

5. While Divitiacus was king, he was most powerful.

6. From Galba’s foresight and justice it results that he is a powerful
king.

7. From the valor of the Bellovaci it came about that they demanded the
management[3] of the war.

    [NOTES.--
    1. Whence: +unde+.
    2. of the Belgæ: not the genitive.
    3. management: +summa+.]


CHAPTER V.

  1. +Interest+ with Gen. of Person: 222; H. 406, III.
  2. Infin. with Subject-Accus. as Subject: 270; H. 538.
  3. Infin. with Subject-Accus. as Object: 272 and Rem.; H. 534.

1. The children of the leading men are brought to Cæsar as hostages.

2. He orders all the children to be brought to him.[1]

3. It concerns Cæsar for[2] the senate to come to him.

4. It concerns Divitiacus to send the forces of the Ædui.

5. Cæsar sees that[3] the forces of the Belgæ are hastening.

6. He learns that the Axona is not far away.

7. This river he crossed[4] and protected his camp by means of its
banks.

    [NOTES.--
    1. him: in Latin, _himself_.
    2. for: not to be expressed in Latin.
    3. that: be careful about _that_-clauses.
    4. he crossed: use +trānseo+.]


CHAPTER VI.

  1. Ablative of Separation: 243; H. 413.
  2. +Cum+ Causal with Subjunctive: 326; H. 517.
  3. Ablative Absolute: 255 and Note on p. 262; H. 431.

1. The enemy formed a testudo and advanced close to[1] the wall.

2. The enemy having hurled stones[2] made a testudo.

3. Since there were so many,[3] they undermined the wall.

4. They easily cleared the walls of soldiers.

5. The Belgæ having cleared the wall made an attack.[4]

6. Having made an attack[5] they threw missiles against the wall.

7. Since the missiles were many, no one was able to stand on the wall.

    [NOTES.--
    1. advanced close to: one word in Latin.
    2. having hurled stones: say, _stones having been hurled_. Why?
    3. so many: +tot+.
    4. attack: use +impetus+.
    5. having made an attack: not +impetum facti+.]


CHAPTER VII.

  1. Ablative of Cause: 245; H. 416.
  2. Perfect Participles of Deponents: 135, b.; H. 231, 2.

1. At midnight archers and slingers were sent by Cæsar to the town.

2. On account of the assistance of the archers and slingers, the people
in the town[1] had good hopes.

3. The enemy had no hope of taking[2] the town, because of the coming of
Cæsar’s soldiers.

4. Cæsar, delaying[3] a little while, sent aid to Iccius.

5. The enemy, after laying waste the fields, hastened against Cæsar’s
camp.

    [NOTES.--
    1. people in the town: one word in Latin.
    2. of taking: +expūgnandi+.
    3. delaying: not present participle.]


CHAPTER VIII.

  1. Indirect Questions: 334; H. 529, I.
  2. Partitive Genitive: 216; H. 396, IV.

1. What can the enemy do by their valor?

2. Cæsar tries what the valor of the enemy is capable of.[1]

3. How much do our men dare?

4. Cæsar makes trial of the daring[2] of his men.

5. How much space can Cæsar’s army occupy?

6. Cæsar explains[3] over how much space the hill extended in front.

    [NOTES.--
    1. is capable of: _can_.
    2. the daring of, etc.: recast the sentence mentally before
    translating, thus: _Cæsar makes trial what his men dare_.
    3. explains: +docet+.]


CHAPTER IX.

  1. Clauses of Purpose: 317 and 1; H. 497, II.
  2. The Gerundive: 113, d, 2 and 296; H. 544, I.

1. He begins to[1] cross the river.

2. They began to lead their forces across.

3. They lead their forces over in order to take the redoubt.

4. Cæsar has shown that the river was behind him.[2]

5. They will cross so as to lay waste the lands of the Remi.

    [NOTES.--
    1. He begins to: _makes a beginning of_.
    2. him: should it be +eum+ or +se+?]


CHAPTER X.

  1. Passive of Intransitive Verbs: 230; H. 301, 1.
  2. Accusative of Limit: 258, b and N. 1; H. 380, II. 2.
  3. Substantive Clauses of Purpose: 331 and N. 1; H. 498.

1. Those of the Belgæ who were not killed returned home.

2. They resolve to fight in their own territories.

3. They decide that it is best[1] to lead over their army.

4. Divitiacus cannot be persuaded[2] to advance to an unfavorable place.

5. The Ædui were persuaded to return to their homes.

6. The enemy advancing into the river were surrounded.

    [NOTES.--
    1. that it is best: _it to be best_.
    2. recast the clause, before trying to turn it into Latin.]


CHAPTER XI.

  1. Ablative of Time: 256; H. 429.
  2. Perfect Participles: 290, d. 1 and 2; H. 550, N. 4.

1. On the departure of the enemy Cæsar sent ahead all his cavalry.

2. At sunset the three legions returned[1] into camp.

3. In the second watch they attacked the enemy’s rear.

4. The Belgæ, fearing[2] an attack, set out at daybreak.

5. The spies, having seen[3] the fugitives, bring back word.[4]

6. Cæsar, after keeping his soldiers in camp, ordered Labienus to set
out.

    [NOTES.--
    1. returned: two words in Latin.
    2. fearing: the participle +veritus+ does not usually denote
    time _prior_ to that of the main verb in the sentence, like most
    perfect participles, but the same time.
    3. having seen: do not say +vīsi+.
    4. bring back word: use +renūntio+.]


CHAPTER XII.

  1. Ablative of Cause, 245; H. 413.
  2. Ablative Absolute: 255 and Note on p. 262; H. 431.

1. Cæsar could not take the town on account of the great number[1] of
the Suessiones.

2. Owing to[2] the works of the Romans, their “vineæ” and towers, the
Suessiones send envoys.[3]

3. The next day Cæsar made a forced march and[4] tried to take the town.

4. The townsmen,[5] making a surrender, got their request.[6]

5. Because of their surrender they got their request.

6. The surrender made, they were spared.

    [NOTES.--
    1. great number: one word in Latin.
    2. Owing to: like “on account of,” not separately expressed in
    Latin.
    3. envoys: use +lēgātus+.
    4. made a forced march and: a different turn in Latin.
    5. townsmen: use +oppidānus+.
    6. got their request: one word.]


CHAPTER XIII.

  1. +Cum+ Temporal with Subjunctive: 325; H. 521, II. 2.
  2. Constructions with +peto+: 239, c. N. 1; H. 374, 2, N. 4.

1. When the arms had been given up,[1] the elders came forth.

2. All the elders came out of Bratuspantium and begged Cæsar for
peace.[2]

3. Cæsar, when he had received their submission, asked the men for
their[3] arms.

4. According to their[4] custom they stretched out their hands and asked
the Romans for peace.

    [NOTES.--
    1. Render this clause in two ways: first by two words, then by
    a full clause. So each of the three following sentences contains
    a clause to be rendered in two ways.
    2. Cæsar for peace: quite otherwise in Latin.
    3. their: omit.
    4. their: is this to be expressed by +eōrum+?]


CHAPTER XIV.

  1. Ablative of Means: 248, 8, c; H. 420.
  2. Ablative with +ūtor+, etc.: 249; H. 421, I.

1. Divitiacus intercedes for the conquered Belgæ.

2. Divitiacus begs that Cæsar will show[1] clemency.

3. Cæsar will exercise kindness toward the Belgæ.

4. By the help of the Belgæ the Ædui sustain wars.

5. Divitiacus says the chiefs had fled to[2] Britain.

6. If you show[3] clemency, you will increase our influence.

7. Whatever[4] war befalls, by means of their[5] resources we shall be
able to hold out.

    [NOTES.--
    1. will show: not the future in Latin.
    2. to: not +ad+.
    3. show: not well rendered by present indicative.
    4. whatever: _if any_.
    5. their: +eōrum+.]


CHAPTER XV.

  1. Partitive Genitive: 216; H. 396, IV.
  2. Ablative of Quality: 251; H. 419, II.
  3. Causal Relative Sentences: 320, e; H. 517.

1. The territories of the Nervii border on the Ambiani.

2. The Nervii blame the Ambiani for having surrendered.[1]

3. The Nervii have[2] great influence among the Belgæ.

4. They use no wine, because it weakens[3] character.

5. Those men think minds lose energy through wine.

    [NOTES.--
    1. for having surrendered: turn by a relative clause.
    2. have: say _are_ (men) _of_.
    3. because it weakens: a relative clause with subjunctive, to
    indicate their view, as distinguished from a statement of fact.]


CHAPTER XVI.

  1. Comparative +amplius+, etc.: 247, c.; H. 417, N. 2.
  2. Accusative of Time and Space: 256 and 257; H. 379.

1. The Nervii were distant a three days’ march.

2. Cæsar finds out that they are ten miles distant.

3. He learns from prisoners what the Nervii are doing.[1]

4. They have taken a position more than five miles from the Sambre.

5. He learns from prisoners that he[2] is waited for by the Nervii.

    [NOTES.--
    1. are doing: be careful about the mode.
    2. that he: _himself_.]


CHAPTER XVII.

  1. Use of +quisquam+: 202, c.; H. 457.
  2. Relative Clauses of Purpose: 317; H. 497, I.
  3. Substitutes for Partitive Gen.: 216, c.; H. 397, N. 3.

1. Certain of the Belgæ went by night to the camp of the Nervii.

2. Cæsar says that certain men went[1] to the Nervii.

3. Many of the prisoners found out about the legions.

4. They were sent to their friends to report[2] the matter.

5. To lop trees is a matter[3] of no difficulty at all.

6. Men were sent ahead to select[4] a suitable place.

    [NOTES.--
    1. went: _to have gone_.
    2. to report: not the infinitive.
    3. matter, etc.: recast, before trying to turn into Latin.
    4. to select: try two ways.]


CHAPTER XVIII.

  1. Descriptive Ablative: 251; H. 419, II.
  2. Clauses of Result: 319; H. 500, I. and II.

1. Along the river Sambre were trees[1] of great height.[2]

2. Among these trees the Nervii keep themselves hidden.

3. So[3] close together[4] were these trees that the Romans could not
see through.

4. The river is of such depth that men can cross.

5. On the open ground are pickets of great courage.

    [NOTES.--
    1. trees: +arbor+, fem.
    2. height: the same word that means _depth_.
    3. So: +ita+.
    4. close together: +crēber+.]


CHAPTER XIX.

  1. Dative of Service: 233 a; H. 390.
  2. Imperfect of Repeated Action: 277; H. 469, II.
  3. Ablative of Manner: 248 and Rem.; H. 419, III.

1. The cavalry of the enemy kept making attacks.

2. They would attack our horsemen with great courage.

3. These horsemen had been sent ahead by Cæsar as a protection to the
camp.

4. Again and again did the enemy pour forward from the woods, where they
had hidden.

5. The slingers and archers helped[1] the horsemen.

6. With great speed they would run as far as[2] the woods.

7. With wonderful bravery they engage in battle with the Nervii.

    [NOTES.--
    1. helped: two words in Latin.
    2. as far as: +ad+, or +usque ad+.]


CHAPTER XX.

  1. The Gerundive: 113, d.; H. 234.
  2. Dative of Apparent Agent: 232; H. 388.
  3. Ablative of Agent with +ā+ or +ab+: 246; H. 415, I.

1. The soldiers are directed[1] by Cæsar.

2. The soldiers must be directed by Cæsar.

3. The flag was displayed by the soldiers.

4. The flag had to be displayed by the soldiers.

5. Experience is often helpful[2] to soldiers.

6. The work is hindered by[3] the near approach[4] of the enemy.

    [NOTES.--
    1. are directed: use +doceo+.
    2. helpful: turn by a noun.
    3. by the near approach: why not +ā+ or +ab+?
    4. near approach: one word.]


CHAPTER XXI.

  1. Ablative of Gerundive with Prepositions: 301; H. 544, 2.
  2. Gerundive Construction instead of Gerund: 296; H. 544, 1.
  3. Purpose expressed by Gerundive: 318 and b; H. 544, 2, N. 2.

1. In looking for his shield a soldier lost time.

2. Time is wanting for putting on a helmet.

3. Seeing[1] the standards, each one went forward.

4. A line was drawn up[2] to resist[3] the enemy’s charge.

5. Cæsar encouraged the tenth legion for the purpose of strengthening[4]
their courage.

    [NOTES.--
    1. seeing: not the gerundive.
    2. A line was drawn up: see chap. xx.
    3. resist: +sustineo+.
    4. strengthening: use +cōnfīrmo+.]


CHAPTER XXII.

  Clauses of Result with +ut (ut nōn)+: 319; H. 500, II.

1. So dense was the hedge that it obstructed the view.

2. The result was that no legion could execute orders.

3. One legion opposes the foe in one part, another in another.


CHAPTER XXIII.

  1. Place to which: 258; H. 380, I.
  2. Place from which: 258; H. 412, I.
  3. Place in which: 258, 4, and 260, b.; H. 425, 1.

1. The Roman soldiers drive the enemy, exhausted by wounds, into an
unfavorable place.

2. They followed them up from the left part of the line.

3. As they attempted[1] to cross the river, a great part of them were
put to the sword.

4. In another part many of the Belgians were killed.

5. On the front the Belgæ pushed for the camp.

6. But at last they were put to flight.

    [NOTE.--
    1. attempted: recast the sentence and express _as they
    attempted_ by a participle referring to _a great part_.]


CHAPTER XXIV.

  1. Position of +causa+ with genitive: 245, c.
  2. Temporal Clauses with +cum+: 325; H. 521, II. 2.

1. The Romans see that the horsemen are scared.

2. Horsemen were coming to Cæsar to render aid.

3. When the camp-followers had gone out for the purpose of plundering,
they saw that our men were fleeing.

4. Seeing the slingers flee,[1] they fled themselves.[2]

    [NOTES.--
    1. flee, _to flee_.
    2. themselves: use +ipse+.]


CHAPTER XXV.

  1. Ablative Absolute: 255 and a.; H. 431, 4.
  2. Perfect Participles of Deponents: 290, d.; H. 195, 2.
  3. Substitutes for Perf. Act. Partc.: 290, d. 2; H. 550, N. 4.

1. Cæsar saw that the soldiers of the twelfth legion were hard pushed.

2. Cæsar, seeing[1] the soldiers of the twelfth legion hard pushed, went
to the right wing.

3. As[2] all the standard-bearers were wounded, the standards were lost.

4. Then Cæsar snatched a shield from a soldier.

5. The soldiers renewed their courage and delayed[3] the enemy’s attack.

    [NOTES.--
    1. seeing: not well rendered +videns+; try casting into a
    clause--first with +ubi+, then with +cum+.
    2. As ... wounded: use a participial construction.
    3. renewed and delayed: it is better not to turn into Latin by
    coördinate verbs.]


CHAPTER XXVI.

  1. Partitive Genitive: 216; H. 397.
  2. Indirect Questions: 334; H. 529, I. & II.
  3. Dative of Service and of Object: 233 and a.; H. 390.

1. One was sent for assistance to another.[1]

2. The soldiers of two legions guarded the baggage.[2]

3. He saw in how great peril the camp was.

4. They will leave nothing undone[3] in point of courage.

5. He will report to me in what state the army is.

6. He saw that the tenth was fighting very bravely.

    [NOTES.--
    1. another: bring the two forms of +alius+ together.
    2. guarded the baggage: make a different turn.
    3. leave nothing undone: a strange Latin idiom.]


CHAPTER XXVII.

  1. Temporal Clauses with +cum+: 325; H. 521, 2.
  2. Clauses of Result with +ut (ut nōn)+: 319; H. 500, II.
  3. Clauses of Purpose with +ut (ne, ut ne)+: 317; H. 497, II.

1. So great is the courage of the Nervii that they fight from the heaps
of corpses.

2. Ascending[1] very high banks, they displayed the greatest courage.

3. They dared to cross a wide stream in order to renew the fight.

4. The cavalry, to wipe out[2] their disgrace, advance even into a
disadvantageous position.

5. The greatness of their spirit rendered difficult things easy.

    [NOTES.--
    1. ascending: turn by a clause with +cum+.
    2. To wipe out: not the infinitive.]


CHAPTER XXVIII.

  1. Ablative of Separation: 243; H. 413.
  2. Substitutes for Partitive Genitive: 216, c; H. 397, N. 3.
  3. Substantive Clauses of Purpose with +ut (ne)+: 331; H. 498.

1. Of five hundred senators, three were left.

2. Out of forty (+quadrāginta+) thousand men, four hundred were able to
bear arms.

3. Cæsar will keep their[1] neighbors from doing[2] harm.

4. The name and nation of the Nervii are reduced[3] almost to
destruction.

5. He orders the neighboring people to refrain from doing harm to the
Nervii.[4]

    [NOTES.--
    1. their: not +suus+.
    2. doing: omit.
    3. reduced: participle used as an adjective in the neuter
    plural.
    4. Nervii: genitive.]


CHAPTER XXIX.

  1. Limit of Motion: 258 and b; H. 380 and 2.
  2. Accusative of Duration of Time: 256; H. 379.
  3. Locative Ablative with Preps.: 260, b; H. 425, I.

1. They carry all their property into one town.

2. During two days they hold out very bravely.

3. For many years they were harassed by the Gauls.

4. On two sides they have high rocks; on another, a wall.

5. Leaving six thousand men this side[1] the Rhine, they return[2] home.

    [NOTES.--
    1. this side: +cis+.
    2. return: commonly +revertor+ in the present, +reverti+ in the
    perfect.]


CHAPTER XXX.

  1. Ablative of Time _when_: 256; H. 429.
  2. Imperfect of Repeated Action: 277; H. 469, II.
  3. Perfect of Completed Action: 279; H. 471, I. and 6.

1. On the day of our arrival frequent sallies were made by the enemy
from the town.

2. During the first days they taunted us from the walls.

3. At a distance the soldiers made an “agger” and a tower.

4. Then the Aduatuci began to jeer.[1]

5. Can[2] men of such little stature place a tower on our wall?

    [NOTES.--
    1. jeer: two words in Latin.
    2. begin with +num+.]


CHAPTER XXXI.

  1. Causal Relative Clauses: 320, e; H. 517.
  2. Dative with certain Intrans. Verbs: 227; H. 385.
  3. Future Conditions less vivid: 307, b; H. 509, N. 1.

1. They surrender to Cæsar, since he is so powerful.[1]

2. The envoys say the enemy are jealous of their[2] valor.

3. It is better to endure death than slavery.

4. If Cæsar should rob the Aduatuci of their arms,[3] they would be
killed.

5. Their enemies would kill them, if they should surrender their arms.

6. It is better to persuade them to give up their arms.

    [NOTES.--
    1. is so powerful: _can so much_ (+tantum+).
    2. their: express by the proper form of +suus+.
    3. of their arms: not the genitive.]


CHAPTER XXXII.

  1. Ablative of Cause: 245; H. 416.
  2. Clauses of Result with +ut (ut nōn)+: 319; H. 500, II.
  3. Substantive Clauses of Purpose with +ut (nē)+: 331; H. 498.

1. They order the people to deliver up their arms.

2. Through Cæsar’s orders, no wrong will be inflicted.

3. Cæsar spared, according to his custom, those who had surrendered.[1]

4. Cæsar orders the neighbors of the Nervii not to harm them.[2]

5. There is so great a quantity of arms in the town that a third part is
concealed.

    [NOTES.--
    1. those who had surrendered: one word in Latin.
    2. them: dative.]


CHAPTER XXXIII.

  1. Causal Clauses with +cum+: 326; H. 517.
  2. Ablative Absolute: 255 and a; H. 431, 4.
  3. Pass. of Intrans. Verbs used impersonally: 230; H. 465, 1.

1. [1]The Aduatuci fought very spiritedly.

2. [1]Thither hasten all the forces of the town.

3. After the shutting[2] of the gates, the townsmen formed a plan.

4. Since they had been driven back, they no longer[3] defended
themselves.

5. Now[4] that the town was occupied, the booty was sold.

    [NOTES.--
    1. Use the passive construction.
    2. After the shutting: turn in two ways.
    3. no longer: +nōn iam+.
    4. Now that the town was occupied: turn in two ways.]


CHAPTER XXXIV.

  1. Ablative of Agent with +ā (ab)+: 246; H. 415, I.
  2. Accus. and Infin. of Indirect Discourse: 330, 2; H. 523, I.

1. All the maritime states were subdued by Cæsar.

2. Cæsar says that the maritime states have been reduced.

3. At this time P. Crassus had been sent with one legion.

4. Crassus informs Cæsar that one legion has been sent to the Veneti.

5. The Veneti, to whom one legion had been sent, border on the ocean.


CHAPTER XXXV.

  1. Relative Clauses of Purpose: 317, 2; H. 497, I.
  2. Verbs of Promising, Hoping, etc.: 380, f.; 535, II.
  3. Dative with Certain Adjectives: 234, a; H. 391, I.

1. The embassies promised to return[1] the next summer.

2. Near the Rhine were many nations of barbarians.

3. These barbarians promised to do Cæsar’s bidding.

4. The barbarians send men to give[2] hostages.

5. So great was the joy[3] that a thanksgiving was decreed.

    [NOTES.--
    1. to return: in the Latin idiom, _themselves to be going to
    return_.
    2. to give: put in two ways.
    3. joy: +gaudium+.]




VOCABULARY.

If the learner, as often as he refers to this vocabulary for the meaning
of a word, will glance over the group of words given in the Etymological
Vocabulary under the same root, he will find his knowledge of the
relations and meaning of words, and consequently his power to read
Latin, rapidly increase.


+Ā+ or +Ab (abs)+, prep. w. abl. [APA-], _from, away from_, 6, 13, 18,
24, 25; _at the hands of_, 31, 33; _away, at a distance of_, 1, 30; _in,
on, at_, 23, 25; _by_, 1, 5, 9, etc.

+Ab·dō+, 3, -didī, -ditum [2 DA-], _put away; hide_, 19.

+Ab·sum+, -esse, āfuī [ES-], _be away from_, 11; _be distant_, 4, 5, 6,
13, 10, 17, 21; with ā or ab and abl.

+Āc+, see +At·que+.

+Ac·cēdō (adc-)+, 3, -cessī, -cessum [CAD-], _go towards, approach_, 13,
w. ad and acc.; _arise, increase in_, 7, with dat.

+Ac·cidō (adc-)+, 3, -cidī, -- [CAD-], _fall to_ or _towards; befall,
happen_, 35; w. dat.
  Cf. incidō, ēveniō.

+Ac·cipiō (adc-)+, 3, -cēpī, -ceptum [CAP-], _take to one’s self;
accept_, 15; _receive_, 13; _suffer_, 33.

+Acervus+, -ī, M. [1 AC-], _thing brought to a point; pile, heap_, 32.

+Aciēs+, ēī- (-e, 23), F. [1 AC-], _edge; line of battle, army_, 8, 9,
19, 20, 23, 25.

+Ācr·iter+, adv. [1 AC-], _sharply; fiercely, desperately_, 10, 33.

+Ad+, prep. w. acc., _to, towards_, 8, 13, 28, etc.; _up to_, 17;
_near_, 4, 19, 21, 33; _for_, 1, 4, 8, 21, etc.; _after, according
to_, 31.

+Ad·aequō+, 1 [IC-, AIC-], _make equal to, equal_, 32.

+Ad·clīvis (acc-)+, -e, adj. [CLĪ-], _sloping upward_, 29.
  Cf. dēclīvis.

+Ad·clīvitās (acc-)+, -ātis, F. [CLĪ-], _upward slope, rise_, 18.
  Cf. dēclīvitās, dēiectus.

+Ad·com·modō (acconm-)+, 1 [2 MA-, MAD-], _fit_ or _adapt to; put
on_, 21.
  Cf. induō.

+Ad·dūcō+, 3, -dūxī, -ductum [DVC-], _lead_ or _bring to_, 5; _lead up_,
1; w. ad and acc.

+Ad·eō+, -īre, -iī, -itum [1 I-], _go to; reach, get at_, 7.

+Ad·ferō (aff-)+, -ferre, attulī, allātum [1 FER-], _bring_ or _carry
to_, 1.

+Ad·fīnitās (aff-)+, -ātis, F. [2 FID-], _relationship by marriage_, 4.
  Cf. propīnquitās.

+Ad·gredior (agg-)+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go to, approach; attack_,
9, 10.
  Cf. adorior.

+Ad·iciō+, 3, -iēcī, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _throw to_ or _against; hurl,
cast_, 21.

+Ad·itus+, -ūs, M. [1 I-, AI-], _going to, approach_, 16, 29; _access,
admittance_, 15.

+Ad·iuvō+, 1, -iūvī, -iūtum [DIV-, DI-, DIAV-], _help, aid_, 17.

+Ad·ministrō+, 1 [2 MAN-, MI-], _put the hand to; attend to_, 20, 22.

+Ad·orior+, 4, -ortus [OL-, OR-], _rise up against; attack_, 11, 17.
  Cf. adgredior.

+Ad·propīnquō (app-)+, 1 [PARC-, PLEC-], _come near to, approach_, 10,
31, w. dat.; 19, w. ad and acc.
  Cf. subeō, succēdō.

+Aduātucī+, -ōrum, M., _tribe, originally German, in Belgian Gaul, on
left bank of the Maas_, 4, 16, 29, 31.

+Ad·ventus+, -ūs, M. [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _coming to_ or _drawing near;
approach, arrival_, 7, 16, 25, 27, 30.
  Cf. successus, aditus.

+Ad·versus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of advertō) [VERT-], _turned to_ or
_towards; opposite, in the face_, 8, 18, 24; adversō colle, _up hill_,
19; w. dat.

+Aedi·ficium+, -ī, N. [AID-; FAC-], _building_, 7.

+Aeduī+, -ōrum, M., _powerful Celtic people between upper courses of
Loire and Seine_, 5, 10, 14, 15.

+Aeduus+, -a, -um, adj., _Aeduan_, 5, 14.

+Aegrē+, adv., _with regret_ or _displeasure; barely, with
difficulty_, 6.

+Aequāl·iter+, adv. [IC-, AIC-], _evenly_, 18.

+Aestās+, -ātis, F. [AID-], _burning season; summer_, 2, 35.

+Aestuārium+, -ī, N. [AID-], _pertaining to rolling; inlet,
sea-marsh_, 28.

+Aetās+, -ātis, F. [1 I-, AI-], _age, old age_, 16.

+Ager+, -grī, M. [AG-], _cultivated land; land, field_, 4, 5, 7, 9.

+Ag·ger+, -eris, M. [GER-], _that which is brought to a place_, i.e.
_materials for a mound_, 20; _mound, rampart_, 12, 30, 32.

+Āgmen+, -inis, N. [AG-], _that which is set in motion; marching
column_, 11, 17, 19, 23, 26.

+Agō+, 3, ēgī, āctum [AG-], _put in motion; bring up_, 12, 30; _take
along_, 29; _carry on, do_, 20.

+Aliās+, adv. (acc. pl. F. of alius) [2 AL- (ALI-)], _at another time_;
aliās ... aliās, _at one time ... at another_, 29.

+Aliēnus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 AL-, (ALI-)], _belonging to another,
another’s_, 10.

+Al·iter+, adv. [2 AL-], _otherwise, in another manner_, 19.

+Alius+, -a, -ud, adj., gen. alīus [2 AL- (ALI-)], _other, another,
different_, 20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 31.

+Alter+, -era, -erum, adj., gen. -ius [2 AL-], _other (of two)_, 5, 21;
alter ... alter, _the one ... the other_.

+Altitūdō+, -inis, F. [1 AL-], _elevation, height_, 5, 12, 18, 31, 32.

+Altus+, -a, -um, adj. [1 AL-], _become great by nourishment; lofty,
high_, 27, 29.

+Ambiānī+, -ōrum, M., _Belgian tribe near modern Amiens_, 4, 15.

+Amīcitia+, -ae, F. [AM-], _friendship_, 14.

+Ā·mittō+, 3, -mīsī, -mīssum [MIT-], _let go from one’s self; lose_, 25.

+Ampli·ficō+, 1 [PLE-, PLO-; FAC-], _make larger, increase_, 14.

+Am·plius+, adv. (N. compar. of amplus) [ambi-; PLE-, PLO-], _more_, 7,
16, 29.

+Andocumborius+, -ī, M., _man of high rank among the Remi_, 3.

+Andēs+, -ium, M., _tribe of Gaul north of the Loire, modern Anjou_, 35.

+Angustus+, -a, -um, adj., _contracted; narrow, difficult_; +in
angustō+, _in a critical state_, 25.

+Animus+, -ī, M. [AN-], _soul; mind, feelings_, 21; _spirit, courage_,
15, 21, 25, 27; _character_, 1.

+Annus+, -ī, M., _that which goes round; year_, 29.

+Ante+, [ANT-], _before_; as adv., = anteā, _before, formerly_, 12, 22,
33; as prep. w. acc., _before_ (of time), 35; (of place), 32.

+Antīquitus+, adv. [ANT-], _from ancient times; in olden times_, 4;
_from of old_, 17.

+A·pertus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of aperiō) [2 PAR-, POR-], _without
covering; open, unobstructed_, 18, 19; _uncovered, exposed_, 23.

+Ap·pellō (adp-)+, 1 [PAL-, PEL-], _bring one’s self to a person;
accost, address_, 25; _call_, 4.

+Ap·ud+, prep. w. acc. [APA-], _near, among_, 2, 4, 7, 14.

+Ar·bitror+, 1 [BA-, VA-], _be a hearer_ or _spectator, think, suppose,
believe_, 4, 28; w. acc. and inf.

+Arbor+, -oris, F. [1 AL-, AR-], _tree_, 17.

+Ar·cessō+, 3, -īvī, -ītum [CAD-], _cause to come to; summon, send
for_, 20.

+Arduus+, -a, -um, adj. [1 AL-, AR-, strengthened to ARDH-],
_steep_, 33.

+Ariēs+, -etis, M., _battering-ram_, 32.

+Arma+, -ōrum, N. [AR-], _things adapted; arms, weapons_, 3, 4, 9, 13,
etc.

+Armātūra+, -ae, F. [AR-], _arming; equipment_, 10, 24.

+Armō+, 1 [AR-], _furnish with arms; arm, equip_, 4, 27.

+A·scendō (adsc-)+, 3, -dī, -scēnsum [SCAND-], _mount up, climb_, 27.

+A·scēnsus (adsc-)+, -ūs, M. [SCAND-], _ascending; ascent, way up_, 33.

+At+, conj., _but, on the other hand_, 23, 27.

+At·que+ (before vowels and consonants), +āc+ (before consonants only),
_and also, and especially, and_, 3, 5, 6, etc.; _as_, 6; _than_, 19.
  Cf. et and -que.

+Atrebatēs+, -um, M., _Belgian people in the region of modern Arras_, 4,
16, 23.

+At·tingō (adt-)+, 3, -tigī, -tāctum, [TAG-], _touch against; approach,
reach_, 32; _border upon_, 15, 34.

+Auctōritās+, -ātis, F. [AVG-], _power, standing, influence_, 4, 14, 15.

+Audāc·ter+, adv. [1 AV-], _boldly_, 10, 26.

+Audeō+, 2, ausus [1 AV-], _venture, dare_, 8, 17, 19, 27; w.
complementary infin.

+Audiō+, 4 [2 AV-], _listen to; hear, hear about_, 12, 31, w. acc.; 12,
w. acc. and infin.

+Aulercī+, -ōrum, M., _tribe in Bretagne and Normandy_, 34.

+Aurunculēius+, -ī, M., _L. A. Cotta, lieutenant of Cæsar_, 11.

+Au·t+, conj. [2 TA-], _or_ (excluding the other), 30, 33; aut ... aut,
_either ... or_, 25.

+Au·tem+, postpositive conj. [2 TA-], _but, on the other hand_, 9;
_moreover_, 19.

+Auxilium+, -ī, N. [AVG-], _aid, support, assistance_, 10, 24, 29; pl.
_auxiliary forces_, 14.
  Cf. subsidium.

+Ā·vertō+, 3, -tī, -sum [VERT-], _turn away from_.
  Aversī, see note, 26.

+Axona+, -ae, F., _river in country of the Belgæ_, 5, 9.


B.

+Baculus+, -ī, M., P. Sextius B., _centurion_, 25.

+Baleāris+, -e, adj., _Balearic, of the Balearic Islands_, 7.

+Barbarus+, -a, -um, adj., _foreign, non-Roman_, 35.

+Belgae+, -ārum, M., _collective name of tribes living in the country
bounded by the Seine, Marne, Moselle, Rhine, and the ocean_, 1, 2, 3,
following.

+Bellovacī+, -ōrum, M., _strongest tribe of the Belgæ, north of the
Seine and on right bank of the Oise and Somme_, 4, 5, 10, 13, 14.

+Bellum+, -ī, N. [DVA-, DVI-], _contest between two; war_, 4, 9, 14, 16,
29, 31, 35.

+Bibrax+, -ctis, F. (N.?), _town of the Remi_, 6.

+Boduōgnātus+, -ī, M., _leader of the Nervii_, 23.

+Bratuspantium+, -ī, N., _chief town of the Bellovaci_, 13.

+Brevitās+, -ātis, F., _shortness, brevity_, 20, 30.
  Cf. exiguitās.

+Britannia+, -ae, F., _Britain_, 4, 14.


C.

+Cadāver+, -eris, N. [CAD-], _that which falls down dead; dead
body_, 27.

+Cadō+, 3, cecidī, cāsum [CAD-], _fall_, 27.

+Caeroesī+, -ōrum, M., _German tribe in Belgian Gaul_, 4.

+Caesar+, -aris, M., _Gaius Julius Cæsar, conqueror of Gaul and author
of the Commentaries_, 1, 2, 5, etc.

+Calamitās+, -ātis, F. [SCAL-], _injury, disaster_, 14, 28.

+Caletī+, -ōrum (-ēs, -um), M., _tribe in Normandy, on the Seine_, 4.

+Cālō+, -ōnis, M., _groom, soldier’s servant_, 24, 26, 27.

+Captīvus+, -a, -um, adj. [CAP-], _taken prisoner; captive_, 16, 17.

+Caput+, -itis, N. [CAP-], _head; individual, person_, 33.

+Carnūtēs+, -um, M., _important Gallic tribe between the Loire and Seine
rivers_, 35.

+Castellum+, -ī, N. dim. [SCAD-, CAD-], _redoubt, stronghold_, 8, 9, 29,
30, 33.

+Castra+, -ōrum, N. [SCAD-, CAD-], _camp_, 2, 5, 6, etc.

+Cāsus+, -ūs, M. [CAD-], _falling; happening; chance_, 21;
_misfortune_, 31.

+Causa+, -ae, F. [CAV-], _cause, reason_, 1, 7, 10, 11; causā, used like
prep. post-positive, _for the sake of, for the purpose of_, 10, 15, 17,
20, 21, 24.

+Cēdō+, 3, cessī, cessum [CAD-], _go; fall back; give way, retreat_, 19.

+Celeritās+, -ātis, F. [CEL-], _swiftness, quickness_, 12, 19, 20,
26, 31.

+Celer·iter+, adv. [CEL-], _swiftly, quickly, promptly_, 3, 12, 23, 33.

+Cēlō+, 1 [2 CAL-, SCAL-], _hide, conceal_, 32, 33.

+Centum+, num. adj. indeclin. [CEN-], _hundred_, 4.

+Centuriō+, -ōnis, M. [CEN-], _commander of a century, centurion,
captain_, 17, 25.

+Certus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 CER-, CRE-], _determined; definite_, 11;
_certain, regular_, 22; certiōrem facere, _inform_, 1, 2, 10, 34; w.
acc. and infin.

+Cēterī+, -ōrum, pl. adj. [CA-, CI-], _the others, rest_, 3.
  Cf. reliquī.

+Cīmbrī+, -ōrum, M., _German tribe which invaded Gaul and the Province
in the second century_, 4, 29.

+Circi·ter+, adv. [CVR-, CIR-; 1 I-], _going in a circle; about, not far
from_, 2, 8, 13, 18, 32.

+Circu·itus+, -ūs, M. [CVR-, CIR-; 1 I-], _going in a circle;
circumference_, 29, 30.

+Circum-+, prep. w. acc. [CVR-, CIR-], _around, about_; here only in
composition.

+Circum·iciō+, 3, -iēcī, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _throw around; place
around_, 6.

+Circum·mūniō+, 4, [2 MV-], _wall up around; blockade_, 30.

+Circum·veniō+, 4, -vēnī, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come around;
surround, outflank_, 8, 10, 23, 24, 26.

+Cis+, prep. w. acc. [CA-, CI-], _on this side, this side of_, 3.

+Citerior+, -us, -ōris, adj. [CA-, CI-], _more on this side; hither,
nearer_, 1, 2.

+Citrā+, prep. w. acc. [CA-, CI-], _on this side, this side of_, 29.
  Cf. cis.

+Cīvitās+, -ātis, F., _citizenship; community_, 3, 4, 5, etc.

+Clāmor+, -ōris, M. [1 CAL-], _loud call; shouting_, 11, 24.

+Claudō+, 3, -sī, -sum, _shut, close_, 33; _close, bring up_, 19.

+Clē·mentia+, -ae, F. [CLĪ-; 1 MAN-, MEN-], _indulgent disposition;
gentleness, mildness_, 14, 31.

+Co·acervō+, 1 [1 AC-], _heap up_, 27.

+Co·epī+, -isse, -ptus (defective verb, with tenses from present stem
lacking) [AP-, OP-], _have begun, began_, 5, 6, 10, 12, 13, 19, 23, 20.

+Cō·gnōscō+, 3, -gnōvī, -gnitum [GNA-, GNO-], _understand thoroughly;
perceive, learn, ascertain_, 2, 5, 11, 17, w. acc. and inf.; 4, 26, w.
indir. question; plperf. _knew_, 10.

+Cō·gō+, 3, -ēgī, -āctum [AG-], _drive together, compel; gather, rally_,
2, 5.
  Cf. condūcō.

+Co·hors+, -hortis, F., _multitude enclosed; cohort_, 5, 25.

+Co·hortātiō+, -ōnis, F., _cheering on, urging, encouraging, appeal
to_, 25.

+Co·hortor+, 1, _cheer on, urge, call upon_, 5, 20, 21, 25, w. acc.; 21
foll. by clause w. ut.

+Collis+, -is, M., _hill_, 8, 18, 19, 22.

+Com·meātus (conm-)+, -ūs, M., _going to and fro; train of supplies,
provisions_, 5, 9.

+Com·ĕs+, -itis, M., _comrade_.

+Com·memorō (conm-)+, 1 [1 SMAR-, MAR-], _keep in mind; mention,
relate_, 28.

+Com·mittō (conm-)+, 3, -mīsī, mīssum [MIT-], _cause to go together;
join_, 19, 21.

+Com·modē (conm-)+, adv. [2 MA-, MAD-], _duly, aptly; easily,
advantageously_, 20.

+Com·moveō (conm-)+, 2, -mōvī, -mōtum [1 MV-, MOV-], _move violently;
startle, alarm, make anxious_, 2, 31.

+Com·mūnis (conm-)+, -e, adj. [2 MV-], _serving together; common,
general_, 4, 5.

+Com·mūtātiō (conm-)+, -ōnis, F. [1 MV-, MOV-], _change_, 27.

+Com·parō (conp-)+, 1 [2 PAR-, POR-], _bring_ or _put together; get
ready, provide, procure_, 2, 12.

+Com·pellō (conp-)+, 3, -pulī, -pulsum [PAL-, PEL-], _drive together,
gather; drive in a body, rout_, 23.

+Com·pleō (conp-)+, 2, -ēvī, -ētum [PLE-, PLO-], _fill completely;
fill_, 24.

+Com·plūrēs (conp-)+, -a (-ia), gen. -ium, adj. [PLE-, PLO-, PLV-],
_several together, a large number_, 17.

+Con-+, for +scom-+ = +cum+ [SEC-], _with, together_; in composition,
denoting completeness or union; sometimes intensive.

+Con·cīdō+, 3, -cīdī, -cīsum [2 SAC-, SEC-, SCĪD-], _cut up entirely;
cut to pieces, destroy_, 11.

+Con·cilium+, -ī, N. [1 CAL-], _that which is called together; meeting,
assembly_, 4, 10.

+Con·currō+, 3, -currī or -cucurrī, -cursum [CEL-, CER-], _run together;
hurry, rally, gather_, 20, 33.

+Con·diciō+, -ōnis, F., [DĪC-, DIC-], _talking together; agreement,
stipulation, terms_, 15, 32.

+Condrūsī+, -ōrum, M., _Belgic tribe on the Meuse_, 4.

+Con·dūcō+, 3, -dūxī, -ductum [DVC-], _lead together; collect, muster_,
2; _hire_, 1.

+Cōn·ferō+, -ferre, -tulī, -lātum [1 FER-], _bring_ or _bear together;
gather, collect_, 15, 25, 29; with reflex. pronoun, _betake one’s self,
go_, 13.

+Cōn·fertus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of cōn·ferciō), _pressed together;
compact, in close array_, 23; _crowded together_, 25.

+Cōn·ficiō+, 3, -fēcī, -fectum [FAC-], _make completely; perform,
accomplish_, 12; _raise, put in the field_, 4; _exhaust, wear out_, 23,
25, 27.

+Cōn·fīdō+, 3, -fīsus sum [1 FID-, FĪD-] _trust entirely; believe, trust
firmly_, 30, w. acc. and infin.

+Cōn·fīrmō+, 1 [2 FER-], _make firm; give assurance, pledge one’s self_,
15, w. acc. and infin.; _encourage, reassure_, 19; _confirm_, 11.

+Cōn·flīgō+, 3, -xī, -ctum [FLAG-, FLIG-], _strike_ or _dash together;
contend, fight_, 5; w. cum and abl.

+Con·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _step together; meet, have an
engagement with, fight_, 23.
  Cf. cōnflīgō, pūgnō.

+Cōn·iciō+, 3, -iēcī, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _throw together; hurl_, 6,
27; _drive, rout_, 23; _place hastily_, 16, 28.
  Cf. compellō.

+Con·iungō+, 3, -iūnxī, -iūnctum [IV-, IVG-], _draw together, join_, 3,
4, 26.

+Con·iūrō+, 1 [IV-, IVG-], _swear together; make a sworn agreement,
conspire_, 1, 3.

+Con·locō (coll-)+, 1, _place, station, set_, 8, 19, 22, 29, 30.

+Cōnor+, 1, _undertake, attempt_, 9, 10, 12, 23.

+Cōn·sanguineus+, -a, -um, adj., _possessing the same blood;
kindred_, 3.

+Cōn·scrībō+, 3, -psi, -ptum [SCARP-], _write together_ (in a list);
_enroll, enlist_, 2, 8, 19.

+Cōn·sēnsus+, -ūs, M. [SENT-], _agreement, harmony, concerted action_,
28, 29.

+Cōn·sentiō+, 4, -sēnsī, -sēnsum [SENT-], _feel with_, 3; _join hands
(with), make common cause with_, 3; w. cum and abl.

+Cōn-sequor+, 3, -secūtus [SEC-], _follow thoroughly; attain,
obtain_, 1.

+Cōn·servō+, 1 [SAL-, SER-], _keep thoroughly; preserve, save, spare_,
12, 15, 28, 31, 32.

+Cōn·sīdō+, 3, -sēdī, -sessum [SED-, SID-], _sit down together; settle,
take position_, 4, 16.

+Cōn·silium+, -ī, N., _consultation; design, plan of action_, 9, 14, 33;
_advice, suggestion_, 17.

+Cōn·similis+, -e, adj., [2 SA-, SIM-], _altogether like, quite
similar_, 11; w. dat.

+Cōn·sistō+, 3, -stitī, -- [STA-], _make stand; take position, stand_,
6, 23, 26; _make a stand, rally_, 11, 17, 21; _depend upon, be based
on_, 33.

+Cōn·spectus+, -ūs, M. [SPEC-], _view, sight_, 25.

+Cōn·spiciō+, 3, -spēxī, -spectum [SPEC-], _look at with attention;
behold, catch sight of, see_, 21, 26, w. acc.; 24, w. acc. and infin.

+Cōn·spicor+, 1 [SPEC-], _get a sight of, espy, observe_, 26, 27.
  Cf. cōnspiciō.

+Cōn·stanter+, adv. [STA-], _standing firm; uniformly_, 2.

+Cōn·stituō+, 3, -uī, -ūtum [STA-], _place together; determine,
appoint_, fix, 11; _set up, place_, 12, 30; _station_, 8, 19; _decide_,
10, w. acc. and infin.
  Cf. statuō.

+Cōn·suēscō+, 3, -suēvī, -suētum [SOVO-, SVO-], _accustom; become
accustomed_; pf. _be accustomed_ (= solēre), 14, 31.

+Cōn·suētūdō+, -inis, F. [SOVO-, SVO-], _custom, habit_, 17, 19, 32.
  Cf. mōs.

+Con·temptus+, -ūs, M. [TEM-], _scorn, contempt_, 30.

+Con·tendō+, 3, -dī, -ntum [1 TA-, TEN-], _strain with all one’s might;
march, push on, hasten_, 7, 9, 10, 12, 19, 23, 24; _struggle, contend_,
9, 13, 30.

+Con·tineō+, 2, -uī, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _hold_ or _keep together;
restrain, hold back_, 11; _keep_, 11, 18, 30.

+Con·trā+, adv. [SEC-], _against, on the other hand_, 17; as prep., w.
acc., 1, 3, 13, 33.

+Con·trārius+, -a, -um, adj. [SEC-], _situated over against, opposite_,
18; w. dat.

+Con·tumēlia+, -ae, F. [TEM-], _great swelling; disgrace, insult_, 14.

+Con·vēniō+, 4, -vēnī, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come together, meet_,
5, 10, 12; impersonal, _be agreed upon_, 19.

+Convertō+, 3, -tī, -sum [VERT-], _wholly turn; turn around, turn,
direct_, 26.

+Con·vocō+, 1 [VOC-], _call together, summon_, 10.

+C·ōpia+, -ae, F. [AP-, OP-], _ability; ample supply, supply_, 2; pl.,
_resources, supplies_, 10; _forces, troops_, 5, 7, 8, etc.

+Cornū+, -ūs, N. [CAR-], _horn; wing of an army_, 23, 25.

+Corpus+, -oris, N. [1 CER-, CRE-], _what is made; body_, 30; _corpse_,
10, 27.

+Cortex+, -icis, M. and F. [CAR-], _part that splits off; bark_, 33.

+Cotī·diē+, adv. [CA-; DIV-, DI-], _on every day; daily, regularly_, 8.

+Cotta+, -ae, M., _L. Arunculeius, one of Cæsar’s lieutenants_, 11.

+Crassus+, -ī, M., _P. Licinius, one of Cæsar’s lieutenants_, 34.

+Crēber+, -bra, -brum, adj. [1 CER-, CRE-], _made to increase; thick,
numerous, frequent_, 1, 17, 30.

+Crēdō+, 3, -didī, -ditum [CRAT-; 2 DA-], _put trust in; believe_, 33,
w. acc. and infin.
  Cf. cōnfīdō.

+Crēs+, -ētis, M., _Cretan_, 7.

+Cruciātus+, -ūs, M. [CVR-, CIR-], _torture_, 31.

+Cum+, prep. w. abl. [SEC-], _with, in company with, together with_, 3,
10, 13, etc.; _at same time with_, 5, 7, 16; _with, provided with_,
11, 33.

+Cum+, conj. [CA-, CI-], temporal, _when_, 1, 4, 6, 8, following; cum
prīmum, _as soon as_, 2; causal, _as, since_, 11, 17, 22, etc.;
concessive, _although, while_, 29; cum ... tum, _both ... and_, 4.

+C·ūnctus+, -a, -um, adj. [IV-, IVG-], _all together; all, entire_, 29.

+Cupiō+, 3, -īvī, -ītum, _desire eagerly, be eager_, 25.

+Curiosolitēs+, -um, M. (acc. -ēs, ās), _people of Armoric Gaul_, 34.

+Cursus+, -ūs, M. [CEL-, CER-], _running, speed_, 23, 26.

+Custōdia+, -ae, F. [SCV-, CV-], _guard-keeping; guard, protection_, 29.


D.

+Dē+, prep. w. abl., _from; down from_, 32; of time, _in, about_, 7;
_for, on account of_, 7; _for, about, concerning_, 2, 4, 6, etc.

+Dē·beō+ [for dehibeō], 2, -uī, -itum [HAB-], _have from_; impersonal,
_owe, ought_, 27, 33.

+Decem+, num. adj. indecl. [DEC-], _ten_, 4.

+Dē·cernō+, 3, -crēvī, -crētum [2 CER-, CRE-], _decide; decide upon,
decree_, 35.

+Dē·certō+, 1 [2 CER-], _fight a decisive battle_, 10.
  Cf. conflīgō, congredior, dīmicō, pūgnō.

+Decimus+, -a, -um, adj. [DEC-], _tenth_, 21, 23, 25, 26.

+Dē·clīvis+, -e, adj. [CLĪ-], _inclining down-hill, sloping_, 18.

+Decumānus (deci-)+, -a, -um, adj. [DEC-], _of the tenth cohort_, in the
phrase, decumāna porta, _rear gate_, 24, main entrance to a Roman camp.

+Dē·currō+, 3, -cucurrī or -currī, -cursum [CEL-, CER-], _run down_,
19, 21.

+Dē·ditīcius+, -a, -um, adj. [1 DA-], _one who has surrendered_; as
noun, M., _prisoner of war_, 17; _subjects_, 32.

+Dē·ditiō+, -ōnis, F. [1 DA-], _giving one’s self up; surrender_, 12,
13, 32, 33.

+Dē·dō+, 3, -didī, -ditum [1 DA-], _give up_ or _away; surrender_, 15,
28, 32.

+Dē·dūcō+, 3, -xī, -ductum [DVC-], _lead away, bring off_, 2, 33, 35;
_bring (to)_, 10, 31.
  Cf. redigō.

+Dē·fendō+, 3, -dī, -fēnsum [FEN-, FEND-], _thrust away; repel_, 29;
_defend_, 10, 12, 31, 33.

+Dē·fēnsiō+, -ōnis, F. [FEN-, FEND-], _protection, defence_, 7.

+Dē·fēnsor+, -ōris, M. [FEN-, FEND-], _defender_, 6, 12.

+Dē·ferō+, -ferre, -tulī, -lātum [1 FER-], _bear_ or _bring away; bear,
report_, 17, 19; _bestow_, 4; w. ad and acc.

+Dē·ficiō+, 3, -fēcī, -fectum [FAC-], _make from; give out, fail_, 10;
_revolt (from), forsake, desert_, 14; w. ab and abl.

+Dē·iciō+, 3, -iēcī, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _hurl down; drive away,
dislodge_, 27.

+Dē·iectus+, -ūs, M. [IA-, IAC-], _slope, declivity_, 8, 22.
  Cf. dēclīvis, adclīvis.

+De·inde+, adv. [2 I-], _from here; thereupon, then, in the next
place_, 1.

+Dē·leō+, 2, -ēvī, -ētum [LI-], _wipe out, destroy_, 27.

+Dē·ligō+, 3, -lēgī, -lēctum [1 LEG-, LIG-], _choose out; choose,
select_, 17, 18, 29.
  Cf. ēlīgō.

+Dē·mōnstrō+, 1 [1 MAN-, MEN-], _point out, explain, mention_, 1, 9, 22;
w. acc. and infin., 17.

+Dēnique+, adv., _and thereupon, finally; at any rate, at least_, 33.

+Dēnsus+, -a, -um, adj., _thick, dense, close_, 22.

+Dē·pōnō+, 3, -posuī, -positum [1 SA-, SI-], _put aside_ or _down; lay
aside, place in safety_, 29.

+Dē·populor+, 1 [SCAL-, SPOL-], _lay waste, ravage_, 7.

+Dē·precor+, 1 [PREC-], _avert by praying; petition against, pray to be
spared_, 31.

+Dē·serō+, 3, -uī, -tum [1 SER-, SVAR-], _undo, sever connection with;
abandon, desert_, 25, 29.

+Dē·sistō+, 3, -stitī, -- [STA-], _remove from; cease, stop_, 11.

+Dē·spectus+, -ūs, M. [SPEC-], _looking down upon; opportunity for
distant views, prospect_, 29.

+Dē·spērō+, 1 [SPA-, PA-], _give up hope; despair of_, 24.

+Dē·spoliō+, 1 [SCAL-, SPOL-], _rob, deprive_, 31; w. acc. and abl.

+Dē·sum+, -esse, -fuī [ES-], _be away; be lacking, fail_, 21.
  Cf. dēficiō.

+Dē·terreō+, 2, -uī, -itum [TER-, TERS-], _frighten from; prevent,
deter_, 3.

+Dē·trahō+, 3, -xī, -ctum, _drag from; take from, remove_, 25.

+Dē·trūdō+, 3, -sī, -sum, _thrust away; remove_, 21.
  Cf. dētrahō.

+Dē·veniō+, 4, -vēnī, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come down into; come
to, reach_, 21; w. prep. and acc.
  Cf. adpropīnquō.

+Dexter+, -tra, -trum, adj, _right, on the right hand_, 23, 25.

(+Diciō+), -ōnis, F., no nom. [DIC-, DĪC-], _sway, control_, 34.

+Dīcō+, 3, -xī, -ctum [DĪC-, DIC-], _point out by speaking; say, state,
mention_, 1, 3, 4, etc.; w. acc. and infin.

+Diēs+, -ēī, M. and F. [DIV-, DI-], _day_, 2, 5, 6, etc.

+Dif·ficilis (disf-)+, -e, adj. [FAC-], _not to be done; difficult,
hard_, 27.

+Dif·ficultās (disf-)+, -ātis, F. [FAC-], _difficulty, strait,
trouble_, 20.

+Dī·ligen·ter+, adv. [1 LEG-, LIG-], _attentively, scrupulously, with
painstaking_, 5, 28.

+Dī·mētior+, 4, -mēnsus [1 MA-, MAN-], _measure off; stake off, lay out,
survey_, 19.

+Dī·micō+, 1, _move rapidly back and forth; fight, contend_, 21.
  Cf. cōnfligō, congredior, contendō.

+Dī·mittō+, 3, -mīsī, mīssum [MIT-], _send out in different directions,
despatch_, 5, 14, 21.

+Dī·ripiō+, 3, -uī, -reptum [RAP-, RVP-], _tear in pieces; sack,
plunder_, 17.

+Dis·cēdō+, 3, -cessī, -cessum [CAD-], _go apart; go away, depart_, 7,
11, 20.

+Dis·cessus+, -ūs, M. [CAD-], _departure, withdrawal_, 14.

+Dis·sipō+, 1, _scatter, break up_, 24.

+Dis·tineō+, 2, -uī, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _keep apart; prevent union
of, separate_, 5.

+Diū+, adv. [DIV-, DI-], _by day; for a long time, long_; compar.
diūtius, 1, 6, 10.

+Dī·versus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of dīvertō) [VERT-], _turned away from;
facing in different directions_, 22; _different_, 23; _separated_, 24.

+Dīvīnus+, -a, -um, adj. [DIV-, DI-], _of the gods, divine_, 31.

+Divitiacus+, -ī, M., _leader of the Ædui, brother of Dumnorix_, 5, 10,
14, 15; _chieftain of the Suessiones_, 4.

+Dō+, dare, dedī, datum [1 DA-], _give_, 2, 3, 20, 21, 35; inter sē,
_exchange_, 1.

+Doceō+, 2, -uī, -ctum [DIC-, DAC- (DOC-)], _show, teach, explain_,
5, 20.

+Domesticus+, -a, -um, adj. [DOM-], _of home, native, own_, 10.

+Domi·cilium+, -ī, N. [DOM-; 2 CAL-, SCAL-], _dwelling-place_, 29.

+Dominor+, 1, _lord it, be master_, 31.

+Domus+, -ūs, F. [DOM-], _home_, 10, 11, 24, 29.

+Du·bitō+, 1 [DVA-; BA-], _go to and fro; doubt, hesitate_, 2, 23.

+Du·centī+, -ae, -a, num. adj. [DVA-, DVI-; CEN-], _two hundred_,
18, 29.

+Dūcō+, 3, -xī, ductum [DVC-], _lead, conduct_, 8, 12, 13, 19.

+Dum+ [for dium], adv. [DIV-, DI-], _while_.

+Duo+, -ae, -o, num. adj. [DVA-, DVI-], _two_, 2, 7, 8, 9, etc.

+Duo·decimus+, -a, -um, adj. [DVA-, DVI-; DEC-], _twelfth_, 23, 25.

+Duo·dē·vīgintī+, num. adj. indecl. [DVA-, DVI-], _eighteen_, 5.

+Du·plex+, -icis, adj. [DVA-; PARC-, PLEC-], _twofold, double_, 29.

+Dux+, -cis, M. [DVC-], _leader_, 23; _guide_, 7.


E.

+Ē+ or +Ex+, prep. w. abl., _from, out of_, 3, 6, 13, etc.; _after_, 6;
_on_, 8; _in consequence of_, 35.

+Eburōnēs+, -um, M., _Belgian people near the Rhine_, 4.

+Ē·ditus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of ēdō) [1 DA-], _set forth; elevated,
rising_, 8.

+Ē·dūcō+, 3, -xī, -ductum [DVC-], _lead out, lead forth_, 8.

+Ef·ficiō (ecf-)+, 3, -fēcī, -fectum [FAC-], _work out; bring about,
effect_, 5, 17; w. ut and subj.

+Ē·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go out; sally forth_, 24; _depart
from, go forth_, 11, 13.

+Ē·gregiē+, adv., _out of the flock; remarkably, excellently_, 29.

+Ē·ligō+, 3, -lēgī, -lēctum [1 LEG-, LIG-], _choose out; pick from,
choose_, 4.
  Cf. dēligo.

+Ē·mittō+, 3, -mīsī, -mīssum [MIT-], _send out; hurl, let fly_, 23.

+Emō+, 3, ēmī, ēmptum [EM-], _take in exchange; buy_, 33.

+Ē·nāscor+, 3, -nātus [GEN-, GN-, GNA-], _grow out, spring up; sprout
forth_, 17.

+Enim+, co-ord. conj., post-positive, _for, in fact_, 17.
  Cf. nam.

+Eō+, adv. (old dat. or abl. N. of is) [2 I-], _there, thither_, 3, 5,
25, 33.

+Equĕs+, -itis, M., [2 AC-], _horseman, cavalry-man, knight_, 9, 18, 19,
24, 26, 27.

+Equester+, -tris, -tre, adj. [2 AC-], _of horsemen, cavalry_, 8, 9.

+Equitātus+, -ūs, M. [2 AC-], _riding; cavalry_, 10, 11, 17, 19.

+Ergō+, _because of; therefore_.

+Ē·ruptiō+, -ōnis, F. [RAP-, RVP-], _bursting forth; sally_, 33.

+Esuviī+, -ōrum, M., _people in Normandy_, 34.

+Et+, co-ord. conj. _and_, 1, 2, 3, etc.; et ... et, _both ... and_, 3,
4, 5, etc.

+Et·iam+, adv. and conj. _and now; also_, 1, 4, 14, 16, 17, 21; _even,
still_, 4, 25, 27.

+Ē·ventus+, -ūs, M. [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _coming forth; outcome, issue,
result_, 22.

+Ex+, see +Ē+.

+Ex·agitō+, 1 [AG-], _disturb, harass_, 29.

+Ex·animō+, 1 [AN-], _deprive of life; make breathless_, 23.

+Ex·audiō+, 4 [2 AV-], _hear distinctly; hear from a distance_, 11.

+Ex·cēdō+, 3, -cessī, -cessum [CAD-], _go out; withdraw, go away_, 25.

+Ex·cursiō+, -ōnis, F. [CEL-, CER-], _running forth; sally_, 30.
  Cf. ēruptiō.

+Ex·eō+, -īre, -iī, -itum [1 I-], _go out; withdraw_, 33.
  Cf. excēdō.

+Ex·ercitō+, 1 [ARC-] _(drive out of the enclosure), keep busy; train,
drill_, 20.

+Ex·ercitus+, -ūs, M. [ARC-], _trained body of men; army_, 1, 2, 5, etc.

+Ex·iguitās+, -ātis, F., _scantiness, shortness_, 21, 33.

+Ex·imius+, -a, -um [EM-], _taken out from; eminent, excellent,
high_, 8.

+Ex·istīmō+, 1, _judge, value; judge, think, believe_, 2, 15, 17, 31; w.
acc. and infin.

+Ex·pedītus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of expediō) [PED-], _unencumbered, in
light marching order_, 19.

+Ex·pellō+, 3, -pulī, -pulsum [PAL-, PEL-], _drive out, banish_, 4.

+Ex·perior+, 4, -pertus [1 PAR-, PER-], _try thoroughly; test, try_, 16.

+Ex·plōrātor+, -ōris, M. [PLV- (PLOV-)], _searcher out; scout, spy_, 5,
11, 17.
  Cf. speculātor.

+Ex·plōrō+, 1 [PLV- (PLOV-)], _search out; try to find out,
reconnoitre_, 4.

+Ex·pūgnō+, 1 [PAC-, PAG-, PVG-], _take by storm; take_, 9, 10, 12.

+Ex-spectō+, 1 [SPEC-], _look out for greatly; wait for, await_, 9,
16, 20.

+Ex·struō+, 3, -strūxī, -strūctum [STRV-], _pile up thoroughly; erect,
construct_, 30.

+Extrēmus+, -a, -um, adj., _furthest; most distant, extreme_, 5, 8, 25;
_last_, 11, 27, 33.


F.

+Facile+, adv. [FAC-], _easily_, 1, 6, 17, 18, 19, 25.

+Facilis+, -e, adj. [FAC-], _able to be done; easy_, 27.

+Faciō+, 3, fēcī, factum; pass. fīō, fĭerī, factus [FAC-], _do,
perform_, 3, 5, 6, etc.; _make_, 1, 2, 6, etc.; _cause, bring about_,
4, 11.
  See certus.

+Facultās+, -ātis, F. [FAC-], _power of doing; opportunity_; pl.
_resources, facilities_, 1.

+Fallō+, 3, fefellī, falsum, _cause to stumble; deceive_, 10.

+Fastīgātus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of fastīgō), _brought to a point;
sloping_, 8.
  Cf. adclīvis, dēclīvis.

+Ferāx+, -ācis, adj. [1 FER-], _apt to bear; fertile_, 4.

+Ferē+, adv. [2 FER-, FRE-], _nearly, almost_, 23, 25, 31.

+Ferō+, ferre, tulī, lātum [1 FER-], _bear, bring, carry_, 10, 26, 28;
_bear, endure_, 1, w. acc. and infin.; _rush_ (in pass.), 24.

+Fertilitās+, -ātis, F. [1 FER-], _fruitfulness, fertility_, 4.

+Ferus+, -a, -um, adj., _wild, fierce, ferocious_, 4, 15.

+Fidēs+, fidē (rare), F. [1 FID-], _trust, confidence; protection_, 3,
13, 14, 15.

+Fīlius+, -ī, M., _son_, 13.

+Fīnis+, -is, M. [2 FID-], _dividing thing; end, limit_, 6, 19; pl.
_land, territory_, 2, 4, 5, etc.

+Fīnitimus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 FID-], _bordering upon; neighboring_, 2;
pl. _neighbors_, 4, 16, 17, 28, 29, 31.

+Fīō+, fĭerī, _factus, be made, become_, see +faciō+.

+Flūmen+, -inis, N., _that which flows; river_, 5, 9, 10, etc.

+Fōrs+, fōrte, nom. and abl. only, F. [1 FER-], _that which brings;
chance_, 21.

+Fōrte+, adv., abl. of fōrs, _by chance; perhaps_, 31.

+Fortis+, -e, adj. [2 FER-], _courageous, brave, stout-hearted_, 25, 33.

+Fort·iter+, adv. [2 FER-], _bravely, gallantly_, 11, 21, 26.

+Fōrtūna+, -ae, F. [1 FER-], _fortune_, 16, 22, 31.

+Fossa+, -ae, F., _thing dug; ditch_, 5, 8, 12, 32.

+Frāter+, -tris, M., _brother_, 3.

+Fremitus+, -ūs, M., _dull roar; din, noise_, 24.
  Cf. strepitus.

+Frōns+, -ntis, F. [FVR-, FERV-], _brow; front_, 8, 23, 25.

+Frūmentārius+, -a, -um, adj. [1 FVG-, FRVG-], _of grain_; w. res,
_grain supply_, 2, 10.

+Frūmentum+, -ī, N. [1 FVG-, FRVG-], _thing eaten; corn, grain_, 3.

+Fuga+, -ae, F. [2 FVG-], _fleeing; flight, rout_, 11, 12, 23, 24,
26, 27.

+Fugiō+, 3, fūgī, -- [2 FVG-], _flee, fly_, 11, 24.

+Fūmus+, -ī, M., _rushing thing; smoke_, 7.

+Funditor+, -ōris, M., _slinger_, 7, 10, 19, 24.

+Furor+, -ōris, M. [FVR-], _raging; blind passion, madness_, 3.


G.

+Galba+, -ae, M., _king of the Suessiones_, 4, 13.

+Galea+, -ae, F. [2 CAL-, SCAL-], _covering; helmet_, 21.

+Gallia+, -ae, F., _Gaul_, 1, 2, 3, 4, 35.

+Gallus+, -ī, M., _a Gaul_, 1, 2, 4, 6, 12, 17, 24, 30.

+Gēns+, gentis, F., _what is begotten; race, tribe_, 28.

+Germānī+, -ōrum, M., _Germans_, 1, 3, 4.

+Gerō+, 3, gessī, gestum [GER-], _bear; carry on, go on with_, 9, 31,
35; pass., _be carried on, take place_, 2, 26; rēs gestae, _operations,
campaigns_, 35.

+Gladius+, -ī, M. [CEL-, CER-], _sword_, 23, 25.

+Grātia+, -ae, F., _favor, popularity, influence_, 6.

+Gravis+, -e, adj., _heavy; severe, serious_, 25.


H.

+Habeō+, 2 [HAB-], _grasp; have, possess_, 1, 3, 4, 8, 29; with reflex
pronoun, _be_, 19.

+Hībernācula+, -ōrum, N. [HĪM-], _winter quarters_, 35.

+Hībernus+, -a, -um, adj. [HĪM-], _belonging to winter_; hīberna
(castra), _winter quarters_, 1.

+Hī·c+, haec, hōc, demonstr. pron. [CA-, CI-], _this, this of mine_, 1,
2, 4, etc.; _he, she, it_, 3, 4, 9, etc.

+Hiemō+, 1 [HĪM-], _pass the winter_, 1.

+Homō+, -inis, M. [HAM-], _man, person_, 1, 4, 6, 15, 27, etc.

+Honōs (honor)+, -ōris, M., _honor, distinction_, 15.

+Hostis+, -is, M., _one who hurts; enemy_, 5, 7, 8, 9, etc.


I.

+Iaceō+, 2, -ui, -- [IA-, IAC-], _be thrown; lie_, 27.

+Iaciō+, 3, iēcī, iactum [IA-, IAC-], _hurl, throw_, 6, 32, 33; _throw
up, construct_, 12.

+Iam+, adv., _at this_ or _that time; now_, 19; neque iam, _and no
longer_, 5, 20, 25, 33.

+Ibī+, adv. [2 I-], _in that place, there_, 4, 5, 8, etc.

+Iccius+, -ī, M., _Belgian of high rank_, 3, 6, 7.

+Ī·dem+, eadem, idem, determ. pron. [2 I-; 3 DA-], _the very; same_, 3,
6, 7, 16, etc.

+Iden·t·idem+, adv. [2 I-], _very same; again and again_, 19.

+I·dōneus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-], _fit; suitable_, 8, 17.

+Īgnis+, -is, M. [AG-], _fire; camp-fire_, 7; _signal-fire, beacon_, 33.

+Ille+, -a, -ud, gen. illīus, demonstr. pron. [ANA-], _that; that one,
the former_, 9, 33; _latter_, 19.

+Illyricum+, -ī, N., _coastland on eastern side of upper Adriatic_, 35.

+Im·pedīmentum (inp-)+, -ī, N. [PED-], _thing entangling; hindrance_,
25; pl., _baggage_, 17, 24, 29; _baggage-train, pack-animals_, 17, 19,
24, 26.
  Cf. sarcina.

+Im·pediō (inp-)+, 4 [PED-], _get the feet in, entangle; hinder,
embarrass, make difficult_, 9, 10, 17, 20, 22, 23, 28.

+Im·pellō (inp-)+, 3, -pulī, -pulsum [PAL-, PEL-, PVL-], _drive on;
incite, influence_, 14.

+Im·perātor (inp-)+, -ōris, M. [2 PAR-, POR-], _commander_ (in chief),
25, 26.

+Im·perātum+, -ī, N., _command_, 3, 35.

+Im·perium (inp-)+, -ī, N. [2 PAR-, POR-], _command, order_, 1, 20, 22;
_chief command, authority_, 4, 23; _power, control_, 1, 3, 11.

+Im·perō (inp-)+, 1 [2 PAR-, POR-], _put a command upon; impose upon,
command_, 3, 21, 28, 32, 35; _direct, dictate_, 11, 33; w. dat. and
subjunctive w. ut.

+Im·petrō (inp-)+, 1 [POT-], _accomplish; obtain, succeed in obtaining a
request_, 12; w. ut and subjunctive.

+Im·petus (inp-)+, -ūs, M. [PET-], _onset, attack, charge_, 11, 19, 21,
24, 25; _fury, violence_, 6.

+Im·prō·vīsus (inp-)+, -a, -um, adj. [VID-], _not foreseen_; dē
imprōvīsō, _unexpectedly, without notice_, 3.

+In+, prep. w. acc. and abl. [ANA-], _into, to_, 2, 3, 5; _in_, 5, 8,
29, etc.; _in, within, on_, 1, 2, 8, etc.; _upon, over_, 5, 29, 30;
_among_, 25; _in the case of_, 32.

+In·cendō+, 3, -dī, -cēnsum, _put fire in; set on fire_, 7.

+In·cĭdō+, 3, -cĭdī, -- [CAD-], _fall into; happen, occur_, 14.
  Cf. accĭdō, ēveniō.

+In·cīdō+, 3, -cīdī, -cīsum [2 SAC-, SEC-, SCĪD-, CĪD-], _cut into,
notch_, 17.

+In·cipiō+, 3, -cēpī, -ceptum [CAP-], _take in hand; begin_, 2; w.
compl. infin.

+In·citō+, 1 [CI-], _set in rapid motion; urge on, hurry, hasten_, 26.
  Cf. impellō.

+In·colō+, 3, -uī, -- _inhabit, live in_, 4; _live, dwell_, 3, 35.

+In·crē·dibilis+, -e, adj. [CRAT-; 2 DA-], _not to be believed;
marvellous, incredible_, 19.

+In·crepitō+, 1, --, --, _make noise against; upbraid, taunt,
abuse_, 15, 30.

+In·cūsō+, 1 [CAV-], _make charges against, accuse, rebuke_, 15.

+Inde+, adv. [2 I-], _from that; then, next_, 19.

+In·dīgnitās+, -ātis, F., _unworthiness; outrage, insult_, 14.

+In·dī·ligen·ter+, adv. [1 LEG-, LIG-], _carelessly, listlessly_, 33.

+In·dūcō+, 3, -xī, -ductum [DVC-], _lead into; draw on, cover_, 33.

+Ind·uō+, 3, -uī, -ūtum, _put into; put on_, 21.

+In·eō+, -īre, -īvī and -iī, -itum [1 I-], _go into; enter upon,
undertake_, 33; _begin_, 2, 35.

+In·ermis+, -e, adj. [AR-], _without armor; unarmed_, 27.

+Īnferior+, -ius, adj. (compar. of īnferus), _lower_, 25; _inferior_, 8.

+Īnfimus+, -a, -um, adj. (superl. of above), _lowest; lowest part of,
bottom_, 18.

+Īn·ferō+, -ferre, -tulī, illātum (inlatum) [1 FER-], _bring into; make
upon, wage_, 14, 29; _inspire in_, 25; _bring upon, cause, inflict_, 14,
32; _carry forward, advance_, 25, 26; _bring in, import_, 15; w. acc.,
or acc. and dat.

+Īn·flectō+, 3, -flēxī, -flexum, _bend, bend down_, 17.

+In·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go into, enter_, 4.

+In·imīcus+, -a, -um, adj. [AM-], _not friendly; hostile_, 31.
  Cf. hostis.

+In·īquitās+, -ātis, F. [IC-, AIC-], _unevenness, inequality_, 22.

+In·īquus+, -a, -um, adj. [IC-, AIC-], _not equal; uneven, unfavorable_,
10, 23, 27, 33.

+In·itium+, -ī, N. [1 I-], _entering upon; beginning_, 9; w. partit.
gen.

+In·iūria+, -ae, F. [IV-, IVG-], _thing done contrary to justice; wrong,
injury, violence_, 28, 32, 33.

+In·nītor+, 3, -nīxus, _lean upon, prop one’s self on_, 27.

+In·rīdeō (irr-)+, 2, -rīsī, -rīsum, _laugh in ridicule; laugh at,
mock_, 30.

+Īn·sequor+, 3, -secūtus [SEC-], _follow close upon; follow up, pursue_,
19, 23.

+Īn·sidiae+, -ārum, F. [SED-, SID-], _taking a position at; stratagem,
trap, snare_, 11.

+Īn·sīgne+, -is, N. [3 SAC-], _distinctive mark; sign, signal_, 20;
_ornament, crest_, 21.

+Īn·sistō+, 3, -stitī, -- [STA-], _set one’s self on; take a stand
on_, 27; w. dat.

+Īn·star+, indecl., N., _image_; used as pred. adj., _like, in form of_,
17; w. gen.

+Īn·stō+, 1, -stitī, -statūrus [STA-], _stand upon; press forward_, 25.

+Īn·struō+, 3, -strūxī, -strūctum [STRV-], _build into; arrange, draw
up_, 8, 20, 22; _build, erect_, 30.

+Intel·legō (interl-)+, 3, -lēxī, -lēctum [1 LEG-], _choose between;
understand, be aware, know, find out_, 8, 10, 33; w. acc. and infin.;
14, w. indir. quest.

+Inter+, prep. w. acc. [ANA-], _in the midst; between_, 9, 17; _among_,
1, 4, 6, 15, 19, 24, 31.

+Inter·cēdō+, 3, -cessī, -cessum [CAD-], _go between; be between, move
between_, 17.

+Inter·cipiō+, 3, -cēpī, -ceptum [CAP-], _take between; intercept_, 27.

+Inter·eā+, adv. [ANA-; 2 I-] _between these things; in the meantime,
meanwhile_.

+Inter·ficiō+, 3, -fēcī, -fectum [FAC-], _make to be between, break in
pieces; kill, put to death_, 10, 11, 23, 25, 31.
  Cf. concīdō, occīdō.

+Inter·iciō+, 3, -iēcī, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _hurl between; place_ or
_plant among_, 17; pass., _intervene_, 22.

+Inter·im+, adv. [ANA-; 2 I-], _in the meantime, meanwhile_, 9, 12,
19, 26.

+Interior+, -ius, adj., compar. of obsolete interus [ANA-], _inner,
interior of_, 2.

+Inter·mittō+, 3, -mīsī, -mīssum [MIT-], _make go apart; discontinue,
cease_, 25.

+Inter·neciō+, -ōnis, F. [1 NEC-, NOC-], _complete destruction,
annihilation_, 28.

+Inter·scindō+, 3, -scidī, -scissum [2 SAC-, SEC-, SCĪD-], _separate
by splitting; cut down, hew away, demolish_, 9.

+Inter·sum+, -esse, -fuī [ES-], _be between; be the concern of,
concern_, 5; w. gen. of price.

+Inter·vāllum+, -ī, N. [1 VEL-, VAL-], _space between stakes of a
palisade; distance, interval_, 23.
  Cf. spatium.

+In·texō+, 3, -uī, -xtum [TEC-, TAX-], _weave in; plait_, 33.

+Intrā+, prep. w. acc. [ANA-], _on the inside; within_, 4, 18, 19.

+Intrō+, 1 [ANA-], _enter, penetrate_, 17.

+Intrō·dūcō+, 3, -xī, -ductum [DVC-], _lead in, bring in_, 5, 10.

+Intrō·mittō+, 3, -mīsī, -mīssum [MIT-], _cause to go within; let in,
admit_, 33.

+Intr·ōrsus+, adv. [VERT-], _towards the inside; into the interior,
within_, 18.

+In·ūsitātus+, -a, -um, adj. [1 AV-], _unusual, strange_, 31.

+In·ūtilis+, -e, adj. [1 AV-], _useless; unserviceable, incapable_, 16;
w. ad and acc.

+In·veniō+, 4, -venī, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come upon; find,
learn_, 16; w. acc. and infin.
  Cf. cōgnōscō.

+In·veterāscō+, 3, -āvī, -- [VET-], _become of long standing; gain a
permanent foothold_, 1.

+In·videō+, 2, -vīdī, -vīsum [VID-], _look towards; be jealous of,
envy_, 31.

+I·pse+, -a, -um (gen. ipsīus), intensive pron. [2 I-; 3 SA-], _person_
or _thing mentioned; self_, 3, 4, 5, etc.; sometimes conveniently
rendered _he, they (the latter)_, 2, 20, 29.

+Is+, ea, id, determ. pron. [2 I-], _person_ or _thing mentioned; he,
that, this_, 1, 2, 3, etc.; akin to talis, foll. by subj. clause, 9, 16.

+Ita+, adv. [2 I-], _in the way stated; so, thus_, 11, 33; w. ut, _in
the way that, just as, as_, 1.

+Ītalia+, -ae, F., _Italy_, 29, 35.

+Ita·que+, conj. [2 I-; CA-, CI-], _and so; therefore_, 7, 22.

+Item+, adv. [2 I-], _even so; so, likewise_, 1, 8, 13, 21, 23, 26.

+Iter+, itineris, N. [1 I-], _going; march, route, line of march, road_,
6, 11, 12, 16, 17, 29.

+Iubeō+, 2, iūssī, iūssum [IV-, IVG-], _order, command, bid_, 5, 11, 25,
28, 33, 35; w. acc. and infin.

+Iū·dicō+, 1 [IV-, IVG-; DIC-], _declare what is law; judge, suppose,
think_, 27.

+Iugum+, -ī, N. [IV-, IVG-], _joining; ridge, chain of hills_, 24.

+Iūs+, iūris, N. [IV-, IVG-], _thing binding; constitution, law_, 3.

+Iūstitia+, -ae, F. [IV-, IVG-], _uprightness, justice, fairness_, 4.

+Iuvō+, 1, iūvī, iūtum [DIV-, DI-, DIAV-], _delight; help, assist_, 3.

+Iūxtā+, adv. [IV-, IVG-], _closely joined; close by, near at hand_, 26.


L.

+L.+, _prænomen Lucius_, 11.

+Labiēnus+, -ī, M., _Titus Labienus, most eminent of Cæsar’s
lieutenants_, 1, 11, 26.

+Lapis+, -idis, M., _stone_, 6.

+Lassitūdō+, -inis, F. [LAG-], _faintness, exhaustion_, 23.

+Lateō+, 2, -uī, --, _lie hidden; be concealed_, 19.

+Lātitūdō+, -inis, F. [STER-, STRA-, STLA-], _breadth; width, expanse,
extent_, 7, 8, 12, 29; _lateral direction_, 17.

+Lātus+, -a, -um, adj. [STER-, STRA-, STLA-], _extended; broad, wide_,
4, 27.

+Latus+, -eris, N. [PLAT-], _thing extending; side, flank_, 5, 8,
23, 25.

+Laxō+, 1 [LAG], _loose; change to open order, widen_, 25.

+Lēgātiō+, -ōnis, F. [3 LEG-], _embassy, legation_, 35.

+Lēgātus+, -ī, M. [3 LEG-], _envoy_, 6, 12, 15, 28, 31, 35;
_lieutenant_, 2, 5, 9, 11, 20.

+Legiō+, -ōnis, F. [1 LEG-], _levying; largest military division,
consisting of 10 cohorts; legion_, 2, 8, 17, etc.

+Legiōnārius+, -a, -um, adj. [1 LEG-], _belonging to a legion;
legionary_, 27.

+Lēn·iter+, adv. [1 I-], _gently, moderately_, 8, 29.

+Levis+, -e, adj. [2 LEG-], _lightly moving; light_, 10, 24.

+Levitās+, -ātis, F. [2 LEG-], _lightness; inconstancy, fickleness_, 1.

+Lēx+, lēgis, F. [3 LEG-], _thing read; written law, law_, 3.
  Cf. iūs.

+Līberāl·iter+, adv. [LIB-; 1 I-], _generously, graciously_, 5.

+Līberī+, -erōrum, M. [LIB-], _those who do as they desire, free
persons; children (of free parents)_, 5.

+Littera+, -ae, F. [LI-], _written character_; pl., _letter, letters;
despatch, despatches_, 1, 2, 35.

+Locus+, -ī, M., _that placed or situated; place, point, position,
situation_, 2, 4, 5, etc.; _state, condition_, 26; pl., +loca+, -ōrum,
N., _region, section, tract_, 4, 19.

+Longē+, adv. [2 LEG-], _in length; far, at a distance_, 4, 5, 19,
20, 21.

+Longus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 LEG-], _long, lengthy_, 21.

+Loquor+, 3, locūtus, _speak, talk_, 31.

+Lūx+, lūcis, F., _that which shines; light, dawn, daylight_, 11.


M.

+Māchinātiō+, -ōnis, F., _contrivance, engine, machine_, 30, 31.

+Magis+, adv. [MAC-, MAG-], _in a higher degree; more_, 22, 32.

+Magistrātus+, -ūs, M. [MAC-, MAG-], _magistracy, ruler_, 3.

+Māgnitūdō+, -inis, F. [MAC-, MAG-], _greatness, size, height_, 12,
27, 30.

+Māgnus+, -a, -um, adj. [MAC-, MAG-], _increased; great_, 4, 5, 6, etc.

+Māior+, -ius, adj., compar. of above, _greater_; māior nātū, _elder_,
13, 28.

+Male·ficium+, -ī, N. [MAL-; FAC-], _evil-doing; outrage, hostile
act_, 28.
  Cf. iniūria, indīgnitās.

+Man·dō+, 1 [1 MA-, MAN-; 2 DA-], _put into one’s hands; give in charge,
enjoin, order_, 5; _entrust, consign_, 24; w. acc. and dat.

+Mani·pulus+, -ī, M. [1 MA-, MAN-; PLE-, PLV-], _thing filling the hand;
(subdivision of a cohort), company, maniple_, 25.

+Mān·suētūdō+, -inis, F. [1 MA-, MAN-; SOVO-, SVO-], _tameness;
gentleness, kindness_, 14, 31.
  Cf. clēmentia.

+Manus+, -ūs, F. [1 MA-, MAN-], _measuring thing; hand_, 13, 19, 30;
_band, force_, 2, 5.

+Maritimus (-umus)+, -a, -um, adj., _of the sea; on the coast,
maritime_, 34.

+Mātūrō+, 1, make ripe; _hasten, make haste_, 5.
  Cf. contendō.

+Māximē+, adv., superl. of magis, q.v.; _most, very_, 4.

+Medius+, -a, -um, adj., _in the middle; middle of_, 7.

+Memoria+, -ae, F. [1 SMAR-, MAR-], _faculty of remembering;
recollection, memory_, 4, 21.

+Menapiī+, -ōrum, M., _Gallic tribe between the Meuse and Scheld_, 4.

+Mercātor+, -ōris, M. [2 SMAR-, MER-], _trader_, 15.

+Meritum+, -ī, N. [2 SMAR-, MER-], _thing deserved; deserts, merit_, 32.

+Mīles+, -itis, M. [MĪL-], _one of the thousand; soldier_, 11, 20, 21,
etc.

+Mīlitāris+, -e, adj. [MĪL-], _of soldiers; pertaining to war,
military_, 4, 22.

+Mīlle+, pl. mīlia or mīllia, num. adj. [MĪL-], _large number
associated; thousand_, 4, 6, 7, etc.

+Minimē+, adv., superl. of minus, _least_, 33.

+Minor+, -us, adj. [2 MAN-, MI-], _smaller_; minus, N., as adv., _less_,
1, 7, 20; _not_ (= nōn), 9.

+Miser+, -era, -erum, adj. [MIS-], _wretched, miserable_, 28.

+Miseri·cordia+, -ae, F. [MIS-], _heart-pity; pity, compassion_, 28.

+Mittō+, 3, mīsī, mīssum [MIT-], _let go; send, despatch_, 2, 3, 5, etc.

+Mōbilitās+, -ātis, F. [1 MV-, MOV-], _ability to be moved, agility;
fickleness, inconstancy_, 1. Opp. to stabilitās.
  Cf. levitās.

+Modo+, adv. [2 MA-, MAD-], _in a measure; only, merely_, 17, 21.

+Modus+, -ī, M. [2 MA-, MAD-], _measuring thing; manner, fashion_, 31.

+Moenia+, -ium, N. [2 MV-], _things that ward off; walls, city walls_,
6, 31.

+Molestē+, adv. [MAC-, MAG-], _in a troublesome manner_; molestē
ferre, _be annoyed or vexed_, 1; w. acc. and infin.

+Moneō+, 2 [1 MAN-, MEN-], _cause to think; direct_, 26; w. acc., foll.
by clause w. ut.

+Mora+, -ae, F. [1 SMAR-, MAR-], _stopping, delay_, 15.

+Morinī+, -ōrum, M., _tribe of Belgæ on Channel, near Calais_, 4.

+Moror+, 1 [1 SMAR-, MAR-], _linger, tarry, delay_, 7, 10, 11.

+Mōs+, mōris, M. [1 MA-, MAN-], _will; custom, manner_, 13, 15.
  Cf. cōnsuētūdō.

+Moveō+, 2, mōvī, mōtum [1 MV-, MOV-], _set in motion; move_, 2, 31.

+Mulier+, -eris, F. [MAL-], _woman, female_, 13, 16, 28.

+Multitūdō+, -inis, F., _large number, body_, 4, 5, 6, etc.; _quantity,
number_, 10, 32.

+Multus+, -a, -um, adj., _much_, pl. _many_, 11, 25, 29.

+Mūnīmentum+, -ī, N. [2 MV-], _means of defence; fortification,
defence_, 17.

+Mūniō+, 4 [2 MV-], _wall; fortify, erect defences about, protect,
make_, (castra), 5, 12, 19, 20, 29.

+Mūnītiō+, -ōnis, F. [2 MV-], _fortifying; fortification, works_, 33.

+Mūrus+, -ī, M. [2 MV-], _encircling thing; wall, city wall_, 6, 12, 13,
17, 29, 30, 32.
  Cf. moenia.


N.

+Nam+, co-ord. conj. [GNA-], _for_, 6, 14, 16, 19, 23, 30; as enclitic,
quisnam, _really, pray_, 30.
  Cf. the postpositive enim.

+Nāscor+, 3, nātus [GEN-, GNA-], _be born; begin, arise_, 18.

+Nātiō+, -ōnis, F. [GEN-, GNA-], _birth; race, people_, 35.
  Cf. populus, gēns.

+Nātūra+, -ae, F. [GEN-, GNA-], _birth; nature, character_, 8, 15, 18,
22, 29.

(+Nātus+, -ūs), only abl. sing., M. [GEN-, GNA-], _birth_, 13, 28.

+Nāvō+, 1 [GNA-, GNO-], _perform with knowledge and zeal; do one’s best,
exert one’s self_, 25.

+Nē+, adv. and conj. [NA-], _no_; adv., _not_, 3, 17; conj., _that not,
lest_ (after expressions involving fear), 1, 5, 8, etc.

+Necessārius+, -a, -um, adj. [2 NEC-], _unavoidable; pressing,
urgent_, 21.

+Necessitās+, -ātis, F. [2 NEC-], _unavoidableness; necessity,
compulsion_, 11; _urgency_, 22.

+Neg·ōtium+, -ī, N., [1 AV-], _not leisure; business, task_, 2;
_trouble, difficulty_, 17.

+Nē·mō+, --, dat. nēminī, abl. wanting, M. and F. [HAM-], _no man;
nobody, no one_, 33.

+Ne·que+ or +nec+, adv. [NA-; CA-, CI-], _and not, and so not_, 3, 5,
10, etc.; neque ... neque, _neither ... nor_, 11, 12, 15, 25.

+Nē·quī·quam+, adv. [CA-, CI-], _not in any way; to no purpose, in
vain_, 27.

+Nerviī+, -ōrum, M., _most warlike tribe of the Belgæ_, 4, 15, 16, etc.

+Neuter+, -tra, -trum, gen. -trīus, adj. [CA-, CI-], _neither
(of two)_, 9.

+Nē·ve+ or +neu+, conj. [NA-], _and not; and that not_, 21.

+Nihil+, indecl., N. [NA-], _nothing_, 15, 26, 28; as adv., _not at
all_, 17, 20.

+Ni·si+, conj. [NA-; SOVO-, SVO-], _if not, unless, except_, 6, 20, 32.

+Nōbilitās+, -ātis, F. [GNA-, GNO-], _being known; high birth_, 6.

+Noctū+, adv. [1 NEC-, NOC-], _by night_, 33.

+Nōlō+, nōlle, nōluī, --, [VOL-], _not wish; be unwilling_, 1.

+Nōmen+, -inis, N. [GNA-, GNO-], _means of knowing; name_, 4, 6, 28.

+Nōminātim+, adv. [GNA-, GNO-], _by name, expressly_, 25.

+Nōminō+, 1 [GNA-, GNO-], _name, mention_, 18.

+Nōn+, adv. [NA-; 2 I-], _not one; not_, 2, 6, 8, etc.

+Nōn·dum+, adv. [NA-; DIV-], _not yet_, 11.

+Nōn·nūllus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-], _not none; some_, 1, 25.

+Nōnūs+, -a, -um, adj., _ninth_, 23.

+Nōs+, nostrum, pl. of ego, pron. [NV-], _we_, 9.

+Noster+, -stra, -strum, poss. pron. [NV-], _our, ours_, 1, 4, 8, etc.

+Novem+, num. adj., indecl., _nine_, 4.

+Noviodūnum+, -ī, N., _chief town of Suessiones_, 12.

+Novus+, -a, -um, adj. [NV-], _new, fresh_, 1, 2; _strange, novel_, 31;
superl., _last, in the rear_, 11, 25, 26.

+Nox+, -ctis, F. [1 NEC-, NOC-], _night_, 6, 7, 12, 17.

+Nūdō+, 1, _make bare; bare, strip_, 6; _leave unguarded_, 23.

+N·ūllus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-], _not any; none, no_, 11, 15, 32; as
dat. of nēmō, _no one_, 6, 35.

+Numerus+, -ī, M., _distributed thing; number, amount, numbers_, 4, 10,
17, 33.

+Numida+, -ae, M., _Numidian_, 7, 10, 24.

+Nun·c+, adv. [NV-; CA-, CI-], _now, at the present time_, 4.

+Nūntiō+, 1 [NV-], _announce, report_, 2, 26, 28, 29, 32.

+Nūntius+, -ī, M. [NV-], _person_ or _thing newly come; messenger_, 1;
_message, news_, 2, 6; w. acc. and infin.


O.

+Ob+, prep. w. acc. [APA-], _towards; on account of_, 35.

+Ob·dūcō+, 3, -xī, -ductum [DVC-], _lead towards; extend, construct_, 8.

+Ob·itus+ (-ūs), M. [1 I-], _going to; destruction_, 29.
  Cf. interneciō.

+Ob·sĕs+, -idis, M. and F. [SED-], _one staying in a place; hostage_, 1,
3, 5, 13, 15, 35.

+Ob·tineō+, 2, -uī, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _lay hold of; have possession
of, hold_, 4.

+Ob·veniō+, 4, -vēnī, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come in the way of;
come against, meet_, 23; w. dat.

+Oc·cāsus (obc-)+, -ūs, M. [CAD-], _going down; setting_, 11.

+Oc·cīdō (obc-)+, 3, -cīdī, -cīsum [2 SAC-, SCĪD-, CĪD-], _strike
against; kill, slay_, 10, 25, 33.

+Oc·cultus (obc-)+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of occulō) [2 CAL-], _covered
over; hidden, secret_, 18.

+Oc·cupō (obc-)+, 1 [CAP-], _take hold of; cover, occupy_, 8; _take
possession of, hold_, 1; pass., _be engaged, occupy one’s self_, 19.

+Oc·currō (obc-)+, 3, -currī, -cursum [CEL-, CER-], _run towards; fall
in with, meet; come against_, 21, 24, 27.
  Cf. obveniō.

+Ōceanus+, -ī, M., _ocean, Atlantic_, 34.

+Octāvus+, -a, -um, adj., _eighth_, 23.

+Octō+, num. adj., indecl., _eight_, 6, 7.

+Of·ferō (obf-)+, -ferre, obtulī, oblātum [1 FER-], _bring towards;
offer, bear, carry_, 21.

+O·mittō+, 3, -mīsī, -mīssum [MIT-], _let go; neglect, leave
untried_, 17.

+Omnis+, -e, adj. [AP-, OP-], _every, all, entire_, 1, 2, 3, etc.

+Onus+, -eris, N. [AN-], _burden; bulk, weight_, 30.

+Opera+, -ae, F. [AP-, OP-], _working; work, service_, 25.

+Opīniō+, -ōnis, F. [AP-, OP-], _thinking; impression, idea,
expectation_, 8, 35; _reputation_, 8, 24.

+O·portet+, 2, -uit, --, impers. [2 PAR-, POR-], _is necessary; must,
ought_, 20; w. pass. infin. or acc. and infin.

+Op·pidānus (obp-)+, -a, -um, adj. [PED-], _of a town_; as noun, M.,
_townsman, inhabitant of a town (other than Rome)_, 7, 33.

+Op·pidum (obp-)+, -ī, N. [PED-], _on the ground; town_, 3, 4, 6, etc.
  Cf. urbs; vīcus.

+Op·portūnus (obp-)+, -a, -um, adj. [1 PAR-, PER-], _of what is opposite
the harbor; suitable, convenient_, 8.
  Cf idōneus.

+Op·pūgnātiō (obp-)+, -ōnis, F. [PAC-, PVG-], _act of assaulting; mode
of attack, assault_, 6.

+Op·pūgnō+, 1 [PAC-, PVG-], _fight against; attack, storm_, 6; _carry by
assault_, 12.

(+Ops+), opis, F. (no nom. or dat. sing.) [AP-, OP-], _obtaining thing;
help, aid_, 31; pl., _resources_, 14.

+Optimus+, -a, -um, adj. used as superl. of bonus [AP-, OP-],
_best_, 10.

+Opus+, -eris, N. [AP-, OP-], _obtaining thing; work, siege-work_, 12,
19, 20, 21; quantō opere, _how greatly_, māgnō opere, _very much_, 5.

+Opus+, indecl. N. (really same word as above) [AP-, OP-], w. est, _is
necessary, is needed_, 8, 22.

+Ōrātiō+, -ōnis, F., _speaking; address, speech, words_, 5, 21.

+Ōrdō+, -inis, M. [OL-, OR-], _weaving; succession, order_, 11, 19, 22;
_rank, line_, 11, 19.

+Orior+, 4, ortus [OL-, OR-], _bestir one’s self; arise, be raised_, 24;
_be descended from_, 4.

+Osismī+, -ōrum, M., _people of Gaul (in Brittany)_, 34.


P.

+P.+, abbrev. of Publius, 25, 34.

+Pābulum+, -ī, N. [PA-], _thing affecting feeding; fodder, forage_, 2.

+Pācō+, 1 [PAC-], _bring to peace; subdue_, 1, 35.

+Paemanī+, -ōrum, M., _German tribe of the Belgæ_, 4.

+Paene+, adv., _nearly, almost_, 10, 24.

+Palūs+, -ūdis, F., _thing having wet clay; marsh, swamp, morass_, 9,
10, 28.

+Pandō+, 3, -dī, passum [2 PAT-, PAD-], _cause to go; spread out,
extend_, 13.

+Pār+, paris, adj. [1 PAR-, PER-], _equal_, 18.

+Parātus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of parō) [2 PAR-, POR-], _brought; made
ready, ready, prepared_, 3, 9, 21; w. infin. or expression of purpose.

+Pars+, partis, F. [2 PAR-, POR-], _that cut; part, portion_, 1, 4, 9,
etc.; _quarter, direction_, 21, 24, 29; _point, side_, 5, 8, 22.

+Partim+, adv. (acc. of Pars) [2 PAR-, POR-], _by a dividing; partly_,
1, 33.

+Parvulus+, -a, -um, dim. adj. [PAV-], _very small; slight,
unimportant_, 30.

+Passus+, -ūs, M. [1 PAT-], _going; double pace, step, pace_, 8, 18;
mīlia passuum, _mile_ (= 5000 feet), 6, 7, 11, 13, 16.

+Pate·faciō+, 3, -fēcī, -factum [2 PAT-; FAC-], _make open; open, throw
open_, 32.

+Pateō+, 2, -uī, -- [2 PAT-], _stand open; be open, spread out,
extend_, 7, 8.

+Pater+, -tris, M. [PA-], _accomplisher of protecting or nourishing;
father_, 4.

+Patior+, 3, passus, _suffer, endure_, 31; _suffer, allow_, 15.

+Patrius+, -a, -um, adj. [PA-], _of a father; of one’s ancestors,
ancestral_, 15.

+Paucus+, -a, -um, adj. [PAV-], _made to cease_; pl. only, _few_, 18; as
substantive, _a few, small number_, 12.

+Paulātim+, adv. [PAV-], _by little and little; gradually, gently_,
8, 26.

+Paulis·per+, adv. [PAV-; 1 PAR-], _for a short time_, 7.

+Paulō+, adv. (abl. N. of paulus) [PAV-], _by a little; a little_, 20.

+Paululum+, dim. adv. [PAV-], _very little; very slightly_, 8.

+Paulum+, adv. (acc. N. of paulus) [PAV-], _a little_, 25.

+Pāx+, pācis, F. [PAC-], _binding thing; peace_, 6, 13, 15, 29, 31, 32.

+Pedĕs+, -itis, M. [PED-], _one that goes on foot; foot-soldier_, 24.

+Pedester+, -tris, -tre, adj. [PED-], _of infantry, infantry_, 17.

+Pedius+, -ī, M., _Quintus Pedius_, Cæsar’s nephew, and lieutenant under
him, 2, 11.

+Pellis+, -is, F. [PLE-], _hide, skin_, 33.

+Pellō+, 3, pepulī, pulsum [PAL-, PEL-], _cause to move; drive,
dislodge_, 24; _rout, defeat_, 17, 19, 24.

+Per+, prep. w. acc. [1 PAR-, PER-], _through; by, by means of_, 11, 20,
31; _on account of_, 16; _through, by way of_, 16; _over_, 10.

+Per·ferō+, -ferre, -tulī, -lātum [1 FER-], _carry through; bear,
endure_, 14; _bear, spread among_, 35.

+Perīclitor+, 1 [1 PAR-, PER-], _test; prove, make trial_, 8.

+Perīculum+, -ī, N. [1 PAR-, PER-], _means of trying, trial; danger,
peril_, 5, 11, 26.

+Per·mittō+, 3, -mīsī, -mīssum [MIT-], _let through; yield, give up_, 3,
31; w. acc. and dat.

+Per·moveō+, 2, -mōvī, -mōtum [1 MV-, MOV-], _stir up thoroughly;
disturb, alarm_, 12, 24.

+Per·spiciō+, 3, -spēxī, -spectum [SPEC-], _see through_, 17, 18;
_perceive clearly, find out, ascertain_, 11, 17, 32.

+Per·suādeō+, 2, -sī, -sum, _thoroughly advise; prevail upon, persuade_,
10, 16; w. dat. and subjunctive w. ut.

+Per·terreō+, 2 [TER-], _thoroughly frighten; demoralize, render
panic-stricken_, 24, 27.
  Cf. perturbō.

+Per·tineō+, 2, -uī, -- [1 TA-, TEN-], _thoroughly hold; extend
to_, 19.

+Per·turbō+, 1 [TVR-], _throw into utter confusion; disconcert, alarm_,
11, 21.
  Cf. permoveō.

+Per·veniō+, 4, -vēnī, -ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come quite to; reach,
arrive at_, 2, 11, 15, 17.

+Pēs+, pedis, M. [PED-], _going thing; foot_, 5, 18, 29, 30.

+Petō+, 3, -īvī and -iī, -ītum [PET-], _fall upon; seek_, 20, 24; _aim
at, make for_, 11, 23; _seek, make request, ask_, 12, 14, w. ut and
subjunct.; _ask, beg_, 13, 31, w. acc.

+Pīlum+, -ī, N. [PIS-], _crushing thing; heavy javelin_, 23, 27.

+Plānitiēs+ (-ēī), F. [PLAT-], _flatness; level stretch of country,
plain_, 8.

+Plērum·que+, adv. (acc. N. of plērusque), _for the most part,
generally_, 30.

+Plērus·que+, -raque, -rumque, adj. [PLE-; CA-, CI-], _larger part of;
most of_, 4.

+Plūrimus+, -a, -um, adj. (used as superl. of multus) [PLE-, PLO-,
PLV-], _most_; acc. N. as adv., _most_, 4.

+Pol·liceor+, 2 [LIC-, LIQV-], _offer very much; offer, promise_, 4, 35.

+Pondus+, -eris, N., _weighing thing; weight, bulk_, 29.
  Cf. onus.

+Pōnō+ [for portsinō], 3, posuī, positum [1 SA-, SI-], _let down; place,
establish, pitch_, 5, 7, 8, 13; _place, base on_, 11.

+Pōns+, pontis, M. [1 PAT-], _means of going; bridge_, 5, 9, 10.

+Populor+, 1 [SCAL-, SPOL-], _pour out people; lay waste, ravage, raid_,
5, 9.
  Cf. dēpopulor, vāstō.

+Populus+, -ī, M. [PLE-, PLO-], _the many; people, nation_, 1, 3, 13,
etc.
  Cf. gēns.

+Por·rēctus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of porrigō) [REG-, RIG-], _stretched
out, stretched forward_, 19.

+Porta+, -ae, F. [1 PAR-, POR-], _thing passed through; gate_, 6, 24,
32, 33.

+Portō+, 1 [1 PAR-, POR-], _bear along, carry, convey_, 5, 29.

+Poscō+, 3, poposcī, -- [PREC-] _ask for urgently; demand,
request_, 15.
  Cf. petō.

+Pos·sideō+, 2, -sēdī, -sessum [SED-], _have and hold, possess_, 4.

+Pos·sum+, posse, potuī [POT-], _be able, can_, 1, 3, 4, etc.; _amount
to, be influential_ or _powerful_, 4, 8.

+Post+, prep. w. acc. [POS-], _behind; after_, 14, 29; _behind_, 5,
9, 19.

+Post·eā+, adv. [POS-; 2 I-], _after this; afterwards_, 17, 30, 32.

+Post·quam+, conj. [POS-; CA-], _after that; after, as soon as,
when_, 5.

+Postrēmō+, _at last, finally_.

+Postrī·diē+, adv. (contr. from posterō diē) [POS-; DIV-, DI-], _on the
day after_, 12, 33; w. gen.

+Postulō+, 1 [PREC-], _ask, demand, require_, 4, 22, 33.
  Cf. poscō.

+Potēns+, -entis, adj. [POT-], _able, mighty, powerful_, 1, 4.

+Potestās+, -ātis, F. [POT-], _ability; power, control_, 3, 31, 34;
_power, ability_, 6.

+Potior+, 4 [POT-], _become master of; get control of, gain_, 7, 24, 26;
w. abl.

+Potius+, adv. (compar.) [POT-], _rather, preferably_, 10; foll. by
quam.

+Prae+, prep. w. abl. [PRO-, PRI-, PRAE-], _before; in comparison
with_, 30.

+Prae·acūtus+, -a, -um, adj. [1 AC-], _sharpened in front; pointed,
sharpened at the point_, 29.

+Prae·beō+ [for praehibeō], 2 [HAB-], _hold forth; furnish, afford_, 17.

+Prae·ceps+, -ipitis, adj. [CAP-], _head foremost; headlong, in
haste_, 24.

+Prae·dor+ [for praehedor], 1, _make booty; plunder, raid_, 17, 24.

+Prae·ferō+, -ferre, -tūlī, -lātum [1 FER-], _bear before; place before,
thrust forward, outdo_, 27; w. acc. and dat.

+Prae·ficiō+, 3, -fēcī, -fectum [FAC-], _place over; put at the head of,
place in command of_, 11; w. acc. and dat.

+Prae·mittō+, 3, -mīsi, -mīssum [MIT-], _send before; send in advance_,
11, 17, 19.

+Prae·scrībō+, 3, -psī, -ptum [SCARP-, SCALP-], _write before; dictate,
prescribe, direct_, 20; w. dat. and indir. question.

+Prae·sertim+, adv. [1 SER-, SVAR-], _by an arranging before;
especially, particularly_, 30.

+Prae·sidium+, -ī, N. [SED-], _sitting before; guard, defence, support_,
5, 19, 26, 29, 33; _protection, safety_, 11.

+Prae·stō+, 1, -stitī, -- [STA-], _stand before; excel_, 15; _put
forth, exhibit_, 27; _be preferable, be better_ (impers.), 31.

+Prae·sum+, -esse, -fuī [ES-], _be before; be in charge of, command_, 6,
9; w. dat.

+Praeter·eā+, _in addition_.

+Premō+, 3, pressī, pressum, _press; push closely, press hard_, 24.

+Prīmi·pīlus+, -ī, M. [PRO-, PRI-; PIS-], _first centurion of the
triarii_, 25.

+Prīmō+, adv. [PRO-], _at first_, 8.

+Prīmum+, adv. (acc. N. of prīmus) [PRO-, PRI-], _first thing; first, in
the first place_, 1, 10, 30; cum prīmum, _as soon as_, 2.

+Prīmus+, -a, -um, adj. [PRO-, PRI-], _first, foremost_, 10, 11, 17,
etc.; as noun, M., _chief, leading man_, 3, 13.

+Prīn·ceps+, -ipis, adj. [PRO-, PRI-; CAP-], _taking first place_; as
noun, _leader, chief_, 5, 14.
  Cf. prīmus.

+Prior+, -ius, gen. -ōris, adj. [PRO-, PRI-], _former; those preceding,
men in front_, 11. Opp. novissimī.

+Prīs·tinus+, -a, -um, adj. [PRO-, PRI-; 1 TA-, TEN-] _former; former,
old time_, 21.

+Prius+, adv. (acc. N. of prior) [PRO-, PRI-], _earlier, sooner_, 32;
foll. by quam.

+Prius·quam+, adv., conj. (= prius quam) [PRO-, PRI-; CA-], _sooner
than, before_, 12; w. subj.
  Cf. prius quam, 32.

+Prō+, prep. w. abl. [PRO-, PRI-], _before; in front of, before_, 8; _in
behalf of_, 14; _in proportion to, to the best of one’s ability_, 25;
_in accordance with, agreeably to_, 31.

+Prō·cēdō+, 3, -cessī, -cessum [CAD-], _go forward; advance, proceed_,
20, 25.

+Pro·cul+, adv. [CEL-], _driven forward; at a distance, afar off_, 30.

+Prō·cumbō+, 3, -cubuī, -cubitum, _bend forwards; fall forward, sink to
the ground_, 27.

+Proelior+, 1, _fight, contend_, 23.
  Cf. dīmicō, congredior.

+Proelium+, -ī, N., _fighting, fight_, 23, 25, 26, 27; _skirmish,
engagement, battle_, 8, 9, 20, 21, 28, 30.

+Pro·fectiō+, -ōnis, F. [FAC-], _going away; setting out,
departure_, 11.

+Pro·ficīscor+, 3, -fectus [FAC-], _begin to go forward; set out, go,
march_, 2, 21, 25, 35.

+Prō·flīgō+, 1 [FLAG-, FLIG-], _strike to the ground; rout, defeat_, 23.
  Cf. pellō, cōniciō.

+Pro·fugiō+, 3, -fūgī, -- [2 FVG-], _flee before; flee for refuge,
escape_, 14.

+Prō·gnātus+, -a, -um, adj. [GEN-, GN-, GNA-], _born, descended, sprung
from_, 29.

+Prō·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go forward; advance, proceed_,
10, 23.
  Cf. prōcēdō.

+Pro·hibeō+, 2 [HAB-], _hold before; hinder, prevent_, 4, w. acc. and
infin.; _keep from, cut off_, 9, 28, w. acc. and abl.

+Prō·iciō+, 3, -iēcī, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _cast forward; give up,
abandon, renounce_, 15.

+Prō·moveō+, 2, -mōvī, -mōtum [1 MV-, MOV-], _move forward,
advance_, 31.

+Prope+, adv. [PARC-, PLEC-], _near; nearly, almost_, 28, 32.

+Pro·perō+, 1 [2 PAR-, POR-], _hasten, make haste_, 11, 35.

+Propīnquitās+, -ātis, F. [PARC-, PLEC-], _nearness, proximity_, 20;
_family connection, kinship_, 4.
  Cf. adfīnitās.

+Propīnquus+, -a, -um, adj. [PARC-, PLEC-], _being near; near, close,
adjacent_, 35, w. dat.

+Prō·pōnō+, 3, -posuī, -positum [1 SA-, SI-], _place before; put forth,
expose to view, display_, 20.

+Prop·ter+, prep. w. acc. [PARC-, PLEC-], _near; on account of_, 4, 8,
12, 16, 20.

+Propter·eā+, adv. [PARC-, PLEC-], _on account of that_; foll. by quod,
_for the reason (that), because_, 4; foll. by indic.

+Prō·pūgnō+, 1 [PAC-, PAG-, PVG-], _fight before; fight in defence, make
defensive sallies_, 7.

+Prō·sequor+, 3, -secūtus [SEC-], _follow onward; pursue, follow after_,
11; _follow, address_, 5.

+Prō·spectus+, -ūs, M. [SPEC-], _forward look; out-look, distant view,
prospect_, 22.

+Prō·tinus+, adv. [1 TA-, TEN-], _before one’s self; at once,
immediately_, 9.

+Prō·turbō+, 1 [TVR-], _drive forward; drive off, frighten away_, 19.
  Cf. pellō.

+Prō·videō+, 2, -vīdī, -vīsum [VID-], _see before; look out, see, attend
to_, 22.

+Prō·vincia+, -ae, F. [VIC-], _territory acquired by conquest;
province_, 29.

+Prō·volō+, 1, -āvī, --, _fly forth; hasten forth, hurry forward_, 19.

+Proximē+, adv., superl. of prope [PARC-, PLEC-], _nearest; most
recently, last_, 8, 19.

+Proximus+, -a, -um, adj. (superl. of propior, no pos.) [PARC-, PLEC-],
_nearest, closest_, 3, 12, 33; _next, following_, 27, (of time) 12, 35.

+Prū·dentia+ (for prō·videntia), -ae, F. [VID-], _seeing before;
foresight, wisdom, prudence_, 4.

+Pūblicus+, -a, -um, adj. [PLE-, PLO-], _belonging to the people_; w.
rēs, _republic, state, government_, 5.

+Puer+, -erī, M., _one begotten; boy, child_, 13, 28.

+Pūgna+, -ae, F. [PAC-, PAG-, PVG-], _thrusting thing; fight, battle_,
16, 25, 28, 29.
  Cf. proelium.

+Pūgnō+, 1 [PAC-, PAG-, PVG-], _fight, contend_, 8, 10, 21, 26, 27, 33.
  Cf. congredior, contendō, dīmicō, proelior.


Q.

+Q.+, abbrev. for +Quīntus+, 2, 5, 9, 11.

+Quā+, adv. (abl. F. of quī) [CA-], _on which side; at what point,
where_, 33.

+Quadrin·gentī+, -ae, -a, num. adj. [CEN-], _four hundred_, 8.

+Quaerō+, 3, -sīvī, -sītum, _seek; ask, enquire, make enquiry_, 4, 15;
_look for, seek, try to find_, 21.
  Cf. petō.

+Quam+, adv. (acc. of quī) [CA-], _in what manner; than_, 10, 19, 20,
21, 22, 31, 32.
  Cf. āc (19).

+Quam·vīs+, adv. [CA-; VOL-], _as you will; as much as you like,
any-so-ever, any_, 31.

+Quantus+, -a, -um, adj. [CA-], _how great, how many_, 4, 5, 14, 26, in
indir. quest.; _as great as, as much as_, 8, 11.
  Cf. tantus.

+Quartus+, -a, -um, adj., _fourth_, 25.

+Quattuor+, num. adj., indecl., _four_, 33.

+Que+, enclitic conj. [CA-, CI-], _and_, 1, 2, 3, etc.
  Joins kindred expressions; sometimes couples a sentence to a
  preceding one.
  Cf. et, atque.

+Quī+, quae, quod, rel. and adj. pron. [CA-, CI-], _who, which, what,
that_, 1, 2, 3, etc.

+Quī·dam+, quaedam, quoddam, indef. pron. [CA-, CI-; 3 DA-], _certain
one, some one_, 17.

+Qui·dem+, adv. [CA-, CI-; 3 DA-], _certainly_; nē ... quidem, enclosing
emphatic word or expression, _not even_, 3, 17.

+Quī·n+, conj. w. subj. [CA-, CI-; NA-], _by which not; but that, that,
from_, 2, 3.

+Quī·nam (quis-)+, quae-, quod-, interrog. pron. [CA-, CI-], _for who?
who, which, what, pray? what in the world?_ 30.

+Quīn·decim+, num. adj., indecl. [DEC-], _fifteen_, 2, 4, 30, 35.

+Quīn·gentī+, -ae, -a, num. adj. [CEN-], _five hundred_, 28.

+Quīnquā·gintā+, num. adj., indecl., _fifty_, 4, 33.

+Quīnque+, num. adj., indecl., _five_.

+Quis+, quae, quid? interrog. pron. [CA-, CI-], _who? which? what?_
4, 8, 11, etc.
  Indef. after sī and nē, _any one, any_, 8, 14, 32, 33.

+Quis·quam+, --, quicquam (quidq-), indef. pron. [CA-, CI-], _any, any
at all_, 17; in negative clauses.

+Quis·que+, quae-, quid- (quod-), indef. pron. [CA-, CI-], _each, each
one, every_, 4, 10, 11, 21, 22, 25.

+Quis·quis+, --, quicquid (quidq-) or quodquod, indef. rel. pron.
[CA-, CI-], _whatever, whatsoever, everything which_, 17.

+Quō+, rel. adv. (dat. and abl. of quī) [CA-, CI-], _in what place_;
(dat. use) _where, whither_, 16 17, 21; conj. (rel. adv.), = ut eō, _by
which, so that, that_, 25.

+Quod+, conj. (acc. N. of qui) [CA-, CI-], _that; in that, because_, 1,
4, 10, etc.; _the fact that_, 17.

+Quo·que+, adv. [CA-, CI-], _also, too, as well_, 10, 22; placed after
word to be emphasized.


R.

+Rāmus+, -ī, M., _growing thing; branch_, 17.

+Ratiō+, -ōnis, F. [RA-], _reckoning; consideration_, 10; _plan, method,
system_, 19, 22.

+Re-, Red-+, _back, away_, in comp. only.

+Re·cipiō+, 3, -cēpī, -ceptum [CAP-], _take back; admit, receive_, 3,
15; with reflex. pron., _recover_, 12; _betake one’s self, retreat, go_,
11, 19, 24.
  Cf. sē cōnferre.

+Red·dō+, 3, -didī, -ditum [1 DA-], _give back; render_, 5.

+Red·eō+, -īre, -iī, -itum [1 I-], _go back; recede, decline, slope
away_, 8.

+Red·igō+, 3, -ēgī, -āctum [AG-], _drive back; bring down, reduce_, 14,
28, 34; _render_, 27.
  Cf. reddō.

+Red·in·tegrō+, 1 [TAG-], _make whole again; renew, restore_, 23,
25, 27.

+Rēdonēs+, -um, M., _tribe of Brittany_, 34.

+Re·dūcō+, 3, -xī, -ductum [DVC-], _lead back_, 9.

+Re·ferō+, -ferre, rettulī, -lātum [1 FER-], _bear back; report,
announce_, 33.
  Cf. adferō, renūntiō.

+Re·fringō+, 3, -frēgī, -frāctum, _break back; break open, tear
open_, 33.

+Regiō+, -ōnis, F. [REG-], _directing, direction; region, district,
locality, country_, 4.

+Rēgnum+, -ī, N. [REG-], _that which rules; power, control_, 1.

+Rē·iciō+, 3, -iēcī, -iectum [IA-, IAC-], _hurl back; throw back, drive
back_, 33.

+Re·languēscō+, 3, -guī, -- [LAG-], _lose energy, be weakened_, 15.

+Re·linquō+, 3, -līquī, -līctum [LIC-, LIQV-] _leave behind, leave_, 5,
8, 29.

+Re·liquus+, -a, -um, adj. [LIC-, LIQV-], _remaining; other, rest of_,
2, 3, 5, etc.; as noun, M., _the rest, the others_, 10, 25.

+Rēmī+, -ōrum, M., _people of Belgium on the Axona_, 3, 4, 5, etc.

+Re·mittō+, 3, -mīsī, -mīssum [MIT-], _send back; hurl back, return_,
27; _relax, weaken_, 15.

+Rēmus+, -ī, M., _a Remian_, 6.

+Re·nūntiō+, 1 [NV-], _bring back word; announce, report_, 24; w. dat.
and acc. and infin.
  Cf. adferō, referō.

+Re·pellō+, 3, reppulī, -pulsum [PAL-, PEL-, PVL-], _drive back,
repulse_, 10.
  Cf. rēiciō.

+Repentīnō+, adv. (abl. of repentīnus), _suddenly_, 33.

+Re·periō+, 4, repperī, -pertum [2 PAR-, POR-], _produce again; find,
find out, ascertain_, 9; w. acc. and infin., 4, 15.

+Rēs+, reī, F. [RA-], _thing spoken of; thing, circumstance, matter,
affair, business, fact_, 1, 2, 3, etc.; rēs frūmentāria, _grain-supply,
provisions_, 2; rēs pūblica, _state, republic_, 5.

+Re·sistō+, 3, -stitī, -- [STA-], _stand back; hold one’s ground,
maintain one’s position, resist_, 22, 23, 26.

+Re·spiciō+, 3, -spēxī, -spectum [SPEC-], _look back, look behind
one_, 24.

+Re·spondeō+, 2, -ndī, -spōnsum, _promise in return; reply, answer_, 32.

+Re·tineō+, 2, -uī, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _keep back; keep up,
maintain_, 21; _keep back, reserve_, 32, 33.

+Re·vertor+, 3, -versus (active in perfect, pluperfect, and future
perfect: reverti, reverteram, revertero) [VERT-], _turn back; return, go
back_, 10, 14, 29, 35.

+Re·vocō+, 1 (VOC-, VAG-), _call back, summon_, 20.

+Rēx+, rēgis, M. [REG-], _ruler; king, chieftain_, 4, 13.

+Rhēnus+, -ī, M., _the Rhine_, 3, 4, 29, 35.

+Rīpa+, -ae, F., _bank, river-bank_, 5, 23, 27.

+Rōmānus+, -a, -um, adj., _Roman_, 1, 3, etc.; as noun, M., _Roman_, 10,
12, 13, etc.

+Rubus+, -ī, M., _red-colored thing; bramble_, 17.

+Rūmor+, -ōris, M., _sounding; report, rumor_, 1.

+Rūpēs+, -is, F. [RAP-, RVP-], _broken thing; cliff, steep rock_, 29.

+R·ūrsus+, adv. [VERT-], _turned back; again, back again_, 19, 23, 24.


S.

+Sabīnus+, -ī, M., _Q. Titurius Sabinus, lieutenant of Cæsar_, 5.

+Sabis+, -is, M., _river Sambre in country of Nervii_, 16, 18.

+Saepēs+, -is, F. [1 SAC-, SAG-], _hedge_, 17, 22.

+Sagittārius+, -ī, M. [1 SAC-, SAG-], _of an arrow; archer, bowman_, 7,
10, 19.

+Salūs+, -ūtis, F. [SAL-, SER-], _being well; preservation, salvation,
safety_, 27, 33; _well-being, welfare_, 5.

+Sarcinae+, -ārum, F., _bundle; luggage, personal baggage_, 17.

+Saxum+, -ī, N. [2 SAC-, SEC-], _fragment of rock; rock, stone_, 29.

+Scientia+, -ae, F. [2 SAC-, SEC-, SCI-], _knowing; knowledge_, 20.

+Scrībō+, 3, -psī, -ptum [SCARP-, SCALP-], _scratch; write, give an
account_, 29.

+Scūtum+, -ī, N. [SCV-, CV-], _covering thing; shield_, 21, 25, 27, 33.

+Sectiō+, -ōnis, F. [2 SAC-, SEC-], _cutting; lot of booty, booty_, 33.

+Secundum+, prep. w. acc. (acc. N. of secundus) [SEC-], _following; in
the direction of, along_, 18.

+Secundus+, -a, -um, adj. [SEC-], _following; second_, 11; _successful,
favorable_, 9.

+Sed+, co-ord. conj., adversative [SOVO-, SVO-], _apart from; but_, 14,
17, 19, 20, 21, 32.

+Senātor+, -ōris, M. [SEN-], _old man; elder, senator_, 28.

+Senātus+, -ūs, M. [SEN-], _office of an old man; council, senate_, 5.

+Senonēs+, -um, M., _tribe on upper Seine_, 2.

+Sententia+, -ae, F. [SENT-], _thinking; opinion, view_, 10.

+Sentēs+, -ium, M., _thorns, briars, brambles_, 17.

+Septimus+, -a, -um, adj., _seventh_, 23, 26.

+Sequor+, 3, secūtus [SEC-], _follow; go along, accompany_, 17; _follow,
result_, 22.

+Servitūs+, -ūtis, F. [1 SER-, SVAR-], _slavery, servitude,
subjection_, 14.

+Servō+, 1 [SAL-, SER-], _save; keep, maintain_, 33.

+Sex+, num. adj., indecl., _six_, 5, 8, 19, 29.

+Sexāgintā+, num. adj., indecl., _sixty_, 4.

+Sex·centī+, -ae, -a, num. adj. [CEN-], _six hundred_, 15, 28.

+Sī+, conj. [SOVO-, SVO-], _if, in case_, 5, 8, 9, etc.; _to see if,
whether_, 9, w. indir. question.

+Sī·c+, adv. [3 SA-; CA-, CI-], _in this manner; so, in such a manner_,
32; _in following manner, as follows_, 4, 15.

+Sīgni·fer+, -erī, M. [3 SAC-; 1 FER-], _standard-bearer, ensign_, 25.

+Sīgni·ficātiō+, -ōnis, F. [3 SAC-; FAC-], _pointing out; announcement,
signal_, 33.

+Sīgni·ficō+, 1 [3 SAC-; FAC-], _show by signs; indicate, show_, 7;
_announce, make known_, 13; w. acc. and infin.

+Sīgnum+, -ī, N. [3 SAC-], _mark; signal, sign_, 20, 21; _military
standard, ensign_, 21, 25, 26; -- convertere, _face about, wheel_, 26;
-- īnferre, _advance to attack, charge_, 25; ad -- cōnsistere, _rally
round the standards_, 21.

+Silva+, -ae, F. [2 SER-, SVAL-], _wood, forest_, 18, 19.

+Silvestris+, -e, adj. [2 SER-, SVAL-], _of a wood; wooded_, 18.

+Simul+, adv. [2 SA-, SIM-], _together; at the same time_, 24.

+Si·ne+, prep. w. abl. [SOVO-], _without_, 5, 11, 15, 25, 31.

+Singulāris+, -e, adj. [2 SA-, SEM-, SIM-], _one by one; remarkable,
extraordinary_, 24.
  Cf. eximius.

+Singulī+, -ae, -a, distrib. num. adj. [2 SA-, SEM-, SIM-], _one to
each; one at a time, separate, single_, 17, 20.

+Sinister+, -tra, -trum, adj. left, _on the left_, 23.

+Sōl+, -is, M. [2 SER-, SVAL-], _sun_, 11.

+Solli·citō+, 1 [SAL-; CI-], _move violently; stir up, instigate,
incite_, 1.

+Sōlum+, adv. (acc. N. of sōlus) [SAL-, SER-], _alone, only_, 14.

+Sōlus+, -a, -um, adj. [SAL-, SER-], _alone, only, sole_, 4.

+Spatium+, -ī, N., [SPA-, PA-], _race-course; space, distance_, 17, 30;
_extent, time_, 11.

+Speciēs+, -iēī, F. [SPEC-], _seeing; sight, form, appearance_, 31.

+Speculātor+, -ōris, M. [SPEC-], _searcher; scout, spy_, 11.
  Cf. explōrātor.

+Spēs+, -eī, F. [SPA, PA-], _hope, expectation_, 7, 25, 27, 33.

+Spīritus+, -ūs, M., _breathing; feeling, pride, haughtiness_, 4.

+Statim+, adv. [STA-], _in standing; at once, immediately_, 11.
  Cf. prōtinus.

+Statiō+, -ōnis, F. [STA-], _standing; guard, out-post, picket_, 18.

+Statuō+, 3, -uī, -ūtum [STA-], _make stand; fix, determine, decide_,
8, 31.

+Statūra+, -ae, F. [STA-], _standing upright; stature, size_, 30.

+Strepitus+, -ūs, M., _clashing, clatter, noise, din_, 11.
  Cf. clāmor, fremitus.

+Studeō+, 2, -uī, -- [SPA-, PA-], _be eager; strive after, be bent
upon, desire_, 1; _devote one’s self to, pay attention to_, 17; w. dat.

+Studium+, -ī, N. [SPA-, PA-], _zeal, eagerness, enthusiasm_, 7.

+Sub+, prep. w. abl. and acc., _under, beneath_, 17; _near to, toward_,
11, 33.

+Sub·eō+, -īre, -iī, -itum [1 I-], _go under; go near, approach closely,
come up_, 25, 27.
  Cf. adpropīnquō, succēdō.

+Sub·itō+, adv. (abl. of subitus) [1 I-], _by coming on stealthily;
suddenly, unexpectedly_, 19; _hastily, offhand_, 33.
  Cf. repentīnō.

+Sub·mittō (summ-)+, 3, -mīsī, -mīssum [MIT-], _send below; send to aid,
despatch, send_, 6, 25; w. dat.

+Sub·ruō (surr-)+, 3, -ruī, -rutum, _tear down below; undermine, dig
under_, 6.

+Sub·sequor+, 3, -secūtus [SEC-], _follow closely, pursue_, 11, 19.

+Sub·sidium+, -ī, N. [SED-], _sitting behind; reserve forces, reserves_,
22, 25; _aid, assistance, help_, 6, 7, 8, 20, 26.
  Cf. auxilium.

+Suc·cēdō (subc-)+, 3, -cessī, -cessum [CAD-], _go below; draw near,
approach closely_, 6.
  Cf. subeō, adpropīnquō.

+Suc·cessus (subc-)+, -ūs, M. [CAD-], _going below; advance, close
approach_, 20.

+Suessiōnēs+, -um, M., _German tribe north of the Marne_, 3, 4, 12, 13.

+Suī+, sibi, sē (sēsē), reflex. pron. referring to subject or speaker,
[SOVO-, SVO-], _self; of himself, of themselves_, etc., 1, 2, 3, etc.

+Sum+, esse, fuī [ES-], _be; exist, be_, 1, 2, 3, etc.

+Summa+, -ae, F. (f. of summus, sc. rēs), _highest (thing); chief
control, general management_, 4, 23.

+Summus+, -a, -um, adj. (superl. of superus), _highest, greatest,
topmost_, 6, 23, 24, 32; _highest part, summit, top_, 18, 26.

+Sū·mō+, 3, -mpsī, -mptum [EM-], _take, claim, assume_, 4.

+Superior+, -ius, gen. -ōris, adj. compar. of superus, _higher, upper_,
18, 23, 26; _preceding, former, past_, 20.
  Cf. altior; prīstinus.

+Superō+, 1, _go over; defeat, vanquish_, 24.
  Cf. vincō.

+Super·sedeō+, 2, -sēdī, -sessum [SED-], _sit over; refrain from, omit,
postpone_, 8; w. abl.

+Super·sum+, -esse, -fuī [ES-], _be above; remain, survive_, 27, 28.

+Sup·plex (subpl-)+, -icis, adj. [PARC-, PLEC-], _folding the knees
beneath; suppliant, beseeching_, 28.

+Sup·plicātiō (subpl-)+, -ōnis, F. [PARC-, PLEC-], _kneeling down;
thanksgiving_, 35.

+Suprā+, adv., _on upper side; above, before_, 1, 18, 29.

+Sus·tentō+, 1 [1 TA-, TEN-], _keep holding up; hold out, maintain one’s
self_, 6, 14.

+Sus·tineō+, 2, -uī, -tentum [1 TA-, TEN-], _hold up under; withstand,
sustain_, 11, 21; with reflex. pron., _hold out_, 6; _keep upright,
stand up_, 25.

+Suus+, -a, -um, poss. adj. [SOVO-, SVO-], _of himself, his own, their
own_, etc., 3, 4, 5, etc.; as noun, M., _their (his) countrymen,
friends_, 6, 8, 9, etc.; N., _property, possessions_, 3, 13, 29.


T.

+T.+, praenomen _Titus, T. Labienus_, 11, 26.

+Tam+, adv. [2 TA-], _so far; so, to such a degree_, 21.

+Tamen+, adv. [2 TA-], _in so far; still, however; nevertheless_ 8, 32.

+Tantulus+, -a, -um, dim. adj. [2 TA-], _so small; so trifling_, 30.
  Cf. parvulus.

+Tantus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 TA-], _of such size; so great, so much_, 3,
5, 6, etc.

+Tardō+, 1, _make slow, retard, check_, 25.

+Tardus+, -a, -um, adj., _slow (weary, exhausted)_, 25.

+Tegimenta (tegu-)+, -ōrum, N., _means of covering; covering,
cover_, 21.

+Tēlum+, -ī, N. [TEC-], _missile, weapon, javelin_, 6, 10, 21, 25,
27, 33.

+Tempus+, -oris, N. [1 TA-, TEN-], _time_ (in general), 5, 14, 19, 20,
21, 24, 33, 34; _moment_, 19; _time, period, day_, 17, 35; _emergency,
crisis_, 22.

+Tendō+, 3, tetendī, tentum (tēnsum) [1 TA-, TEN-], _stretch; stretch
out, extend_, 13.
  Cf. pandō.

+Teneō+, 2, -uī, -- [1 TA-, TEN-], _hold, have_, 23; _hold,
surround_, 24.

+Tener+, -era, -erum, adj. [1 TA-, TEN-], _tender, young_, 17.

+Terror+, -ōris, M. [TER-, TERS-], _frightening; great fear, fright,
panic_, 12.

+Tertius+, -a, -um, adj., _third_, 1, 32, 33.

+Testūdō+, -inis, F., _having a shell; tortoise, bulwark of shields_, 6.

+Teutonī+, -ōrum (-ēs, -um), M., _German tribe_, 4, 29.

+Timeō+, 2, -uī, --, _fear, be afraid, entertain fears_, 26, w. nē
followed by subjunctive.

+Titurius+, -ī, M., _Q. Titurius Sabinus, lieutenant of Cæsar’s_, 5,
9, 10.

+Titus+, -ī, M., _praenomen of Labienus, Cæsar’s lieutenant_, 11, 26.

+Tormentum+, -ī, N. [TARC- (TARP-), TREP-], _thing twisted; machine of
war, engine for hurling_, 8.

+Tot·idem+, adj., indecl. [2 TA-; 3 DA], _just as many, same number
of_, 4.

+Tōtus+, -a, -um, gen. totīus, adj. [TV-, TO-], _increased; whole,
entire_, 4, 6, 19, 23.

+Trabs+, trabis, F. [TARC- (TARP-), TREP-], _beam, timber_, 29.

+Trā·dō+, 3, -didī, -ditum [1 DA-], _give over; hand over, give up,
surrender_, 13, 15, 31, 32.

+Trā·dūcō+, 3, -xī, -ductum [DVC-], _lead over; lead across, bring
over_, 4, 5, 9, 10.

+Trāns+, prep. w. acc., _across, over, beyond_, 16, 35.

+Trāns·eō+, -īre, -iī, -itum [1 I-], _go over; go across, cross_, 9, 10,
23, 24, 27.

+Trāns·gredior+, 3, -gressus [GRAD-], _go over; go across, cross_, 19.
  Cf. trānseō.

+Trāns·versus+, -a, -um, adj. [VERT-], _turned across; crosswise, at
right angles, oblique_, 8.

+Trēs+, tria, gen. -ium, num. adj., _three_, 11, 18, 28, 33.

+Trēverī+, -ōrum, M., _Celtic tribe on the Moselle_, 24.

+Tribūnus+, -ī, M., _tribune_, 26.

+Trī·duum+, -ī, N. [DIV-, DI-, DIAV-], _three days’ time_, 16.

+Tuba+, -ae, F., _trumpet_, 20.

+Tum+, adv. [2 TA-], _then, at that time_, 2, 6; _then, in addition,
further_, 27, 29; cum ... tum, _both ... and_, 4.

+Tumultus+, -ūs, M. [TV-, TVM-], _swelling; confusion, uproar,
noise_, 11.
  Cf. strepitus.

+Tumulus+, -ī, M. [TV-, TVM-] _swelling up; mound, hillock, hill_, 27.

+Turonēs+, -um (-ī, -ōrum), M., _tribe of Gaul on Loire_, 35.

+Turpitūdō+, -inis, F. [TARC- (TARP-), TREP-], _ugliness; disgrace,
dishonor_, 27.

+Turris+, -is, F. [TVR-], _tower_, 12, 30, 33.

+Tūtus+, -a, -um, adj. (P. of tueor), _well guarded; safe, secure_,
5, 28.


U.

+Ubi+, rel. adv. [CA-, CI-], _in which place; where_, 8, 35; _when, as
soon as_, 6, 8, 9, 10, 19, 25, 30, 31.

+Ūllus+, -a, -um, gen. ūllīus, dim. adj. [2 I-], _any one (at all),
any_, 11, 15, 25; w. negative expression.

+Ūnā+, adv. (abl. F. of ūnus) [2 I-], _in one and the same place; at the
same time, together_, 16, 17, 24, 28, 29; foll. by cum and abl.

+Ūn·decimus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-; DEC-], _eleventh_, 23.

+Undi·que+, adv. [CA-, CI-], _whencesoever; from every quarter, from all
sides_, 6, 10.

+Uneīlī+, -ōrum, M., _tribe in Normandy_, 34.

+Ūni·versus+, -a, -um, adj. [2 I-; VERT-], _turned into one; whole, all,
in a mass_, 33.

+Unus+, -a, -um, gen. -īus, num. adj. [2 I-], _one_, 2, 5, 6, 29, 31,
34; _one, one and the same_, 3, 5, 19, 20; _common, one alone_, 4, 22;
_alone, only_, 33; _a_, 25.

+Urgeō+, 2, ursī, -- [VERG-, VRG-], _press, press hard_, 25, 26.

+Ūsus+, -ūs, M. [1 AV-], _using; practice, experience_, 20; _use,
advantage_, 9, 12.

+Ut+ or +Utī+, conj. [CA-, CI-], _in what manner; as_, 1, 7, 11, etc.,
w. indic.; _in order that, that, to_, 2, 8, 9, etc.; _that, so that_, 3,
4, 5, etc.

+Uter·que+, -traque, -trumque, gen. utrīusque, pron. [CA-, CI-], _both
one and the other; each of two, both_, 8, 16, 25.

+Ūtor+, 3, ūsus [1 AV-], _use, make use of, employ, have_, 3, 7, 10, 25,
28; _use, practise_, 14, 28; _enjoy, maintain_, 32; w. abl.


V.

+Vacuus+, -a, -um, adj., _empty, clear, free, unoccupied_; w. ab and
abl., 12.

+Vadum+, -ī, N. [BA-, VA-], _place through which one can go; ford,
crossing_, 9.

+Valeō+, 2, -uī, -itūrus, _be strong, have influence_, 4, 17.

+Vāllum+, -ī, N. [1 VEL-, VAL-], _earthen wall; earth-works, rampart_,
5, 30, 33.

+Varius+, -a, -um, adj., _spotted; changing, different_, 22.

+Vāstō+, 1, _make empty; lay waste, ravage_.
  Cf. populor, dēpopulor.

+Velocassēs+, -um, M., _one of the minor Belgian tribes_, 4.

+Vēn·dō+, 3, -didī (-ditum) [1 DA-], _place for sale; sell_, 33.

+Venellī+, see +Unellī+.

+Venetī+, -ōrum, M., _tribe of Bretagne_, 34.

+Veniō+, 4, vēnī, ventum [BA-, VA-, VEN-], _come, approach_, 2, 3, 5,
etc.

+Verbum+, -ī, N. [VER-], _that spoken; word, discourse,
intercession_, 14.

+Vereor+, 2 [1 VEL-, VER-], _feel awe; fear, be afraid_, 11.

+Vergō+, 3, --, -- [VERG-], _bend, incline_, 18.

+Vērō+, adv. (abl. N. of vērus) [VER-], _in truth, in fact, but,
however_, 2, 27, 31.

+Veromanduī+, -ōrum, M., _Gallic tribe in modern Picardy_, 4, 16, 23.

+Versō+, 1 [VERT-], _keep turning_; pass., _be engaged in, be occupied
about_, 24; _dwell, remain, be_, 1.

+Vesper+, -erī or -eris, M., _evening, nightfall_, 33.

+Vester+, -tra, -trum, _your, yours_.

+Vetō+, 1, -uī, -itum [VET-], _leave in old state; advise against,
forbid_, 20.

+Vēxillum+, -ī, N. [VAG-, VEH-], _military ensign, banner, flag_, 20.

+Vēxō+, 1 [VAG-, VEH-], _keep carrying; harass, overrun_, 4.

+Vīctor+, -ōris, M. [VIC-], _conqueror, victor_, 28; in appos.
_conquering, victorious_, 24.

+Vīcus+, -ī, M., _row of houses; village, hamlet_, 7.

+Videō+, 2, vīdī, vīsum [VID-], _see, perceive_, 12, 19; _see, know_, 5,
10, 24, 25, 26, 30, 31, w. acc. and infin.; pass., _seem, appear_, 11,
16, 18, 28, 33; _seem good, seem best_, 20.

+Vigilia+, -ae, F., _being awake; watch, night-watch_, 11, 33.

+Vīmen+, -inis, N. [VI-, VIC-], _means of binding; willow, withe,
wicker-work_, 33.

+Vincō+, 3, vīcī, vīctum [VIC-], _conquer, defeat_, 28.
  Cf. superō.

+Vīnea+, -ae, F. [VI-, VIC-], _shelter for vines; covered shed, movable
shelter_, 12, 30.

+Vīnum+, -ī, N. [VI-, VIC-], _wine_, 15.

+Vir+, virī, M., _male, man_, 25, 33.

+Virtūs+, -ūtis, F., _manhood; bravery, valor_, 4, 8, 15, 21, 24, 27,
31, 33.

+Vīs+, vim, vī, F., _strength, power_, 30.

+Vītō+, 1, _shun, try to escape, avoid_, 25.

+Vix+, adv. [VIC-], _with effort; barely, scarcely, hardly_, 28.

+Voluntās+, -ātis, F. [VOL-], _will, wish, desire_, 4.

+Vōx+, vōcis, F. [VOC], _that which calls out; voice, utterance_,
13, 30.

+Vulgō (volgō)+, adv. (abl. of vulgus) [VERG-, VALG-], _among the
people; generally, commonly_, 1.

+Vulnerō+, 1 [2 VEL-, VOL-], _wound, injure_, 25.

+Vulnus+, -eris, N. [2 VEL-, VOL-], _wound, hurt_, 23, 25, 27.




ETYMOLOGICAL VOCABULARY.


The relation in meaning of some words in certain groups to the root is
sometimes obscure or even impossible to be traced with absolute
certainty. Sometimes the relation is obscured by the omission in this
vocabulary of an interlinking word, because it does not occur in the
text. Let us take an example close at hand, the root AID- and the noun
+aestuārium+. The notion “inlet” seems very remote from the notion
“burn.” But +aestuārium+ is formed from +aestus+ (for _aedtus_), the
first meaning of which is _the raging of fire, waves or billows of
heat_. As we might expect, a secondary meaning is, _the raging of water,
waves, billows_, in the proper sense. From the force of the suffix
+-ārium+, +aestuārium+ should mean a _sea-marsh_, or _a tract overflowed
at high tide_; and from this the notion “inlet,” the place through which
the tide rushes, comes naturally enough.

The following roots, with their meanings, have been mostly taken from
the excellent Elementary Latin Dictionary of Dr. Charlton T. Lewis.

    1. AC-, sharp, pierce.
  +Aciēs+, edge, line of battle.
  +Prae·acūtus+, sharpened at the point.
  +Ācr·iter+, sharply.
  +Acervus+, heap.
  +Co·acervō+, heap up.

    2. AC-, swift.
  +Equĕs+, horseman.
  +Equester+, of horsemen.
  +Equitātus+, cavalry.

    AG-, drive.
  +Agō+, drive, lead.
  +Cō·gō+ [for _con·agō_], drive together, compel.
  +Red·igō+, drive back, reduce.
  +Ager+, land.
  +Āgmen+, marching column.
  +Īgnis+, fire.
  +Ex·agitō+, harass.

    AID-, burn.
  +Aedi·ficium+ [from _aedēs, hearth_], building.
  +Aestās+ [for _aid·tās_], summer.
  +Aestuārium+ [for _aid·t-_], inlet.

    1. AL-, AR-, feed, grow, raise.
  +Altus+, high.
  +Altitūdō+, height.
  +Arduus+, steep.
  +Arbor+, tree.

    2. AL- (ALI-), other, strange.
  +Alius+, other.
  +Aliās+, at some other time.
  +Aliēnus+, another’s.
  +Al·iter+, other-wise.
  +Alter+, the other (of two).

    AM-, love.
  +Amīcus+, friend.
  +Amīcitia+, friendship.
  +In·imīcus+, unfriendly, hostile.

        AN-, breathe.
  +Animus+, spirit.
  +Ex·animō+, make breathless.
  +Onus+ (as the cause of panting), weight.

    ANA-, pronominal stem, third person.
  +In+, in, into.
  +Inter+, between.
  +Inter·eā+, meanwhile.
  +Inter·im+, meanwhile.
  +Interior+ [compar. of obs. _interus_], inner.
  +Intrā+, within.
  +Intrō+, enter.
  +?Ille+ [old form _ollus_, from _onolus_], that one.

    ANT-, before, against.
  +Ante+, before, formerly.
  +Antīquitus+, of old.

    AP-, OP-, lay hold of work, help.
  (+Ops+), aid.
  +Opus+, work.
  +Opera+, exertion, service.
  +C·ōpia+ [for _com·opia_], supply.
  +Co·epī+ [for _com·apiō_], begin.
  +Optimus+, best.
  +Omnis+ [for _apnis_], all.
  +Opīniō+, impression.

    APA-, _away, from_.
  +Ab+, from, by.
  +Ap·ud+, among.
  +Ob+, against.

    AR-, fit.
  +Armō+, arm.
  +Arma+, arms.
  +Armātūra+, equipment.
  +In·ermis+, unarmed.

    ARC-, shut in, keep off.
  +Ex·ercitus+, army.
  +Ex·ercitātus+, trained.

    1. AV-, mark, desire, delight.
  +Audeō+, dare.
  +Audāc·ter+, boldly.

  +Ūtor+ [for _avtor_], use.
  +Ūsus+, use, experience.
  +In·ūsitātus+, unusual.
  +In·ūtilis+, useless.
  +Neg·ōtium+ [for _nec·avtium_], business.

    2. AV-, mark, notice.
  +Audiō+, hear.
  +Ex·audiō+, overhear.

    AVG-, grow.
  +Auctōritās+, power.
  +Auxilium+, aid.

    BA-, VA-, VEN-, go.
  +Ar·bitror+ [for _ad·batror_], believe.
  +Du·bitō+, doubt, hesitate.
  +Vadum+, ford.
  +Veniō+, come.
  +Ad·ventus+, arrival.
  +Circum·veniō+, outflank.
  +Con·veniō+, meet.
  +Dē·veniō+, come to.
  +Ē·ventus+, outcome.
  +In·veniō+, find.
  +Ob·veniō+, fall in with.
  +Per·veniō+, arrive at.

    CA-, CI-, pronominal stem, _who_.
  +Quī+, who.
  +Quī·dam+, a certain one.
  +Qui·dem+, certainly.
  +Quīn+ [for _quī·nē_], but that.
  +Quā+, where.
  +Quō+, whither.
  +Quod+, because.
  +Quis+, who?
  +Quī·nam+, who, pray?
  +Quis·quam+, any.
  +Nē·quī·quam+, in vain.
  +Quis·quis+, whoever.
  +Quis·que+, each one.
  +Quo·que+, also.
  +Cum (quom)+, when.
  +Quam+, than.
  +Quam·vīs+, how-so-ever.
  +Post·quam+, after.
  +Prius·quam+, sooner than.
  +Quantus+, how great.
  +Que+, and.
  +Ita·que+, and so.
  +Ne·que+, and not.
  +Ubi+ [for _quō·bi_], where.
  +Undi·que+ [for _cunde·que_], from all sides.

  +Cēterī+, the others.
  +Cis+, this side of.
  +Citerior+, hither.
  +Citrā+, this side of.
  +Ut+ or +Utī+ [for _cutī_ or _quotī_], as, in order that.
  +Uter·que+ [for _quoter·que_], each.
  +Ne·uter+, neither.

  +Cotī·diē+, daily.
  +Hī·c+ [for _hī·ce_], this.
  +Nun·c+ [for _num·ce_], now.
  +Sī·c+ [for _sī·ce_], so.

    CAD-, fall.
  +Cadō+, fall.
  +Ac·cidō (adc-)+, befall.
  +In·cidō+, happen.
  +Cadāver+, dead body.
  +Cāsus+, happening.
  +Oc·cāsus (obc-)+, setting.
  +Cēdō+, give way.
  +Ac·cēdō (adc-)+, approach.
  +Dis·cēdō+, depart.
  +Dis·cessus+, departure.
  +Ex·cēdō+, withdraw from.
  +Inter·cēdō+, intervene.
  +Prō·cēdō+, advance.
  +Suc·cēdō (subc-)+, approach.
  +Suc·cessus (subc-)+, close approach.
  +Ar·cessō+ [for _ad·cēdsō_], summon.

    1. CAL-, CAR-, call.
  +Con·cilium+, meeting.
  +Clāmor+, shouting.

    2. CAL-, SCAL-, cover, hide.
  +Oc·cultus (obc-)+, hidden.
  +Galea+, helmet.
  +Domi·cilium+, dwelling-place.
  +Cēlō+, hide.

        CAP-, take, hold.
  +Ac·cipiō (adc-)+, receive.
  +In·cipiō+, begin.
  +Inter·cipiō+, intercept.
  +Re·cipiō+, receive.
  +Captīvus+, captive.

  +Oc·cupō (obc-)+, take into possession.
  +Caput+, head.
  +Prae·ceps+, headlong.
  +Prīn·ceps+, leader.

    CAR-, SCAR-, hard, scrape.
  +Cortex+, bark.
  +Cornū+, horn, wing.

    CAV-, watch.
  +Causa+, cause.
  +In·cūsō+, accuse.

    CEL-, CER-, strike, drive.
  +Gladius+ [for _cladius_], sword.
  +Celeritās+, swiftness.
  +Celer·iter+, swiftly.
  +Pro·cul+, at a distance.
  +Cursus+, running.
  +Con·currō+, run together.
  +Dē·currō+, run down.
  +Oc·currō (obc-)+, meet.
  +Ex·cursiō+, sally.

    CEN-, hundred.
  +Centum+, hundred.
  +Centuriō+, centurion.
  +Du·centī+, two hundred.
  +Quadrin·gentī+, four hundred.
  +Quīn·gentī+, five hundred.
  +Sex·centī+, six hundred.

    1. CER-, CRE-, make.
  +Crēber+, numerous.
  +Corpus+, body.

    2. CER-, CRE-, part.
  +Dē·cernō+, decide upon.
  +Dē·certō+, fight decisively.
  +Certus+, sure.

    CI-, rouse.
  +In·citō+, urge on.
  +Solli·citō (sōli-)+, stir up.

    CLĪ-, lean.
  +Clē·mentia+, mildness.
  +Ad·clīvis (acc-)+, sloping upward.
  +Ad·clīvitās (acc-)+, upward slope.
  +Dē·clīvis+, sloping downward.

    CRAT-, faith.
  +Crē·do+, [for _crat·dō_], believe.
  +In·crē·dibilis+ [for _in·crat·dibilis_], incredible.

    CVR-, CIR-, curve.
  +Circum+, around.
  +Circi·ter+, about.
  +Circu·itus+, circumference.
  +Cruciātus+, torture.

    1. DA-, give.
  +Dō+, give.
  +Dē·dō+, give up.
  +Dē·ditīcius+, one who has surrendered.
  +Dē·ditiō+, surrender.
  +Ē·ditus+ [P. of _ē·dō_], rising.
  +Red·dō+, give back.
  +Trā·dō+ [for _trāns·dō_], give over.
  +Vēn·dō+ [for _vēnum·dō_], sell.

    2. DA-, put.
  +Ab·dō+, hide.
  +Crē·dō+, believe.
  +In·crē·dibilis+, incredible.
  +Man·dō+, commission.

    3. DA-, pronominal stem, third person.
  +Ī·dem+, the same.
  +Quī·dam+, a certain one.
  +Qui·dem+, indeed.
  +Tot·idem+, just as many.

    DEC-, ten.
  +Decem+, ten.
  +Decimus+, tenth.
  +Decumānus (deci-)+, of the tenth (cohort), in the phrase,
      _porta decumāna_, the main entrance to a Roman camp.
  +Ūn·decimus+, eleventh.
  +Duo·decimus+, twelfth.
  +Quīn·decim+, fifteen.

    DĪC-, DIC- (DAC-), show, point.
  +Dīcō+, say.
  +Doceō+, teach.
  +Iū·dicō+, judge.
  (+Diciō+), control.
  +Con·diciō+, condition.

    DIV-, DI-, DIAV-, shine.
  +Dīvīnus+, divine.
  +Diēs+, day.
  +Cotī·diē+, daily.
  +Postrī·diē+ [for _posterō diē_), next day.
  +Trī·duum+, three days’ time.
  +Dum+ [for _dium_], while.
  +Nōn·dum+, not yet.
  +Diū+, for a long time.
  +Iuvō+, [for _diuvō_], aid.
  +Ad·iuvō+, aid.

    DOM-, build.
  +Domus+, home.
  +Domi·cilium+, dwelling-place.
  +Domesticus+, of home.

    DVA-, DVI-, apart, two.
  +Duo+, two.
  +Duo·decimus+, twelfth.
  +Duo·dē·vīgintī+, eighteen.
  +Du·bitō+, doubt, hesitate.
  +Du·centī+, two hundred.
  +Du·plex+, two-fold.
  +Bellum+ [for _duellum_], war.

    DVC-, lead.
  +Dux+, leader.
  +Dūcō+, lead.
  +Ad·dūcō+, bring to.
  +Con·dūcō+, gather.
  +Dē·dūcō+, lead off.
  +Ē·dūcō+, lead out.
  +In·dūcō+, cover.
  +Intrō·dūcō+, lead in.
  +Ob·dūcō+, extend.
  +Re·dūcō+, lead back.
  +Trā·dūcō+ [for _trāns·dūcō_], lead across.

    EM-, take.
  +Emō+, buy.
  +Ex·imius+, excellent.
  +Sū·mō+ [for _sub·imō_], take.

    ES-, be, live.
  +Sum+ [for _esum_], be.
  +Ab·sum+, be away.
  +Dē·sum+, be lacking.
  +Inter·sum+, be between.
  +Prae·sum+, command.
  +Super·sum+, survive.

    FAC-, put, make.
  +Faciō+, do.
  +Fīō+, passive of _faciō_, become.
  +Cōn·ficiō+, accomplish, wear out.
  +Dē·ficiō+, fail.
  +Ef·ficiō+, bring about.
  +Inter·ficiō+, kill.
  +Pate·faciō+, throw open.
  +Prae·ficiō+, place in command.
  +Pro·ficīscor+, put one’s self forward, set out.
  +Pro·fectiō+, setting out.
  +Facilis+, easy.
  +Facile+, easily.
  +Aedi·ficium+, building.
  +Ampli·ficō+, enlarge.
  +Dif·ficilis (disf-)+, difficult.
  +Dif·ficultās (disf-)+, difficulty.
  +Facultās+, opportunity.
  +Male·ficium+, outrage.
  +Sīgni·ficō+, announce.
  +Sīgni·ficātiō+, signal.

    FEN-, FEND-, strike.
  +Dē·fendō+, ward off, defend.
  +Dē·fēnsiō+, defence.
  +Dē·fēnsor+, defender.

    1. FER-, bear.
  +Ferō+, bear.
  +Ad·ferō (aff-)+, bring to.
  +Cōn·ferō+, bring together.
  +Dē·ferō+, carry.
  +Īn·ferō+, bring upon.
  +Of·ferō (obf-)+, carry.
  +Per·ferō+, endure.
  +Prae·ferō+, place before, out-do.
  +Re·ferō+, bring back.
  +Fertilitās+, fertility.
  +Ferāx+, fertile.
  +Fōrs+, chance.
  +Fōrtūna+, fortune.
  +Sīgni·fer+, standard-bearer.

    2. FER-, FRE-, hold, fix.
  +Ferē+, almost.
  +Cōn·fīrmō+, give assurance, reassure.
  +Fortis+ [for _forctis_], brave.
  +Fort·iter+, bravely.

    1. FID-, FĪD-, bind, trust.
  +Fidēs+, faith.
  +Cōn·fīdō+, trust.

    2. FID-, split.
  +Fīnis+ [for _fidnis_], limit.
  +Fīnitimus+, neighboring.
  +Ad·fīnitās+, connection by marriage.

    FLAG-, FLIG-, strike.
  +Cōn·flīgō+, contend with.
  +Prō·flīgō+, defeat.

        1. FVG-, FRVG-, use, enjoy.
  +Frūmentum+ [for _frūgimentum_], grain.
  +Frūmentārius+, of grain.

    2. FVG-, bend, flee.
  +Fuga+, flight.
  +Fugiō+, flee.
  +Pro·fugiō+, flee.

    FVR-, FERV-, rage, swell.
  +Furor+, frenzy.
  +?Frōns+, front.

    GEN-, GN-, GNA-, beget.
  +Nāscor (gn-)+, arise.
  +Ē·nāscor+, grow out.
  +Nātus+, birth.
  +Nātiō+, nation.
  +Nātūra+, nature.
  +Prō·gnātus+, sprung from.

    GER-, carry.
  +Gerō+, carry on.
  +Ag·ger (adg-)+, mound.

    GNA-, GNO-, know.
  +Nam+, for.
  +Nāvō+ [for _gnāvō_], perform with knowledge and zeal.
  +Cō·gnōscō+, learn.
  +Nōbilitās+, high birth.
  +Nōmen+, name.
  +Nōminātim+, by name.
  +Nōminō+, mention.

    GRAD-, walk.
  +Ad·gredior (agg-)+, attack.
  +Con·gredior+, meet.
  +Ē·gredior+, go from.
  +In·gredior+, enter.
  +Prō·gredior+, advance.
  +Trāns·gredior+, cross.

    HAB-, have.
  +Habeō+, have.
  +Dē·beō+ [for _de·hibeō_], owe to.
  +Prae·beō+ [for _prae·hibeō_], furnish.
  +Pro·hibeō+, restrain.

    HAM-, man.
  +Homō+, man.
  +Nē·mō+ [for _ne·homō_], nobody.

    HĪM-, cold.
  +Hiemō+, pass the winter.
  +Hībernus+ [for _hiemernus_], of winter.
  +Hībernācula+, winter quarters.

    1. I-, AI-, go.
  +Ad·eō+, approach.
  +Ad·itus+, approach.
  +Circu·itus+ [for _circum·itus_], circumference.
  +Ex·eō+, go forth, set out.
  +In·eō+, enter upon.
  +In·itium+, beginning.
  +Ob·itus+, destruction.
  +Red·eō+, return.
  +Sub·eō+, approach closely.
  +Sub·itō+, suddenly.
  +Trāns·eō+, cross.
  +Iter+, route.
  +Aetās+ [for _aevitās_], age.

  From +iter+ is the _adv., ending -iter_ or _-ter_, as in
    _aequāl·iter_ for _aequale·iter, al·iter, audāc·ter, celer·iter,
    circi·ter, diligent·(t)er, fort·iter, lēn·iter, in·diligent·(t)er_.

    2. I-, AI-, pronominal stem, third person, demonstrative.
  +Is+, this one.
  +Eō+, there.
  +Inter·eā+, meanwhile.
  +Inter·im+, meanwhile.
  +Post·eā+, afterwards.
  +Propter·eā+, for the reason (that).
  +Ī·dem+, the same.
  +Iden·t·idem+ [for _idem·et·idem_], again and again.
  +I·pse+, self.
  +Ibī+, there.
  +Inde+, thence.
  +De·inde+, thereupon.
  +Ita+, thus.
  +Ita·que+, therefore.
  +Item+, likewise.
  +?I·dōneus+, suitable.

  +Ūnus+ [for _oenus_], one.
  +Ūnā+, together.
  +Ūni·versus+, all.
  +Ūn·decimus+, eleventh.
  +Ūllus+ [for _ūnulus_], any.
  +Nūllus+ [for _ne·ūnulus_], none.
  +Nōn·nūllus+, some.
  +Nōn+ [_ne·oenum (ūnum)_], not.
  +Nōn·dum+, not yet.

    IA-, IAC-, go, send.
  +Iaciō+, throw.
  +Ad·iciō+, hurl.
  +Circum·iciō+, place around.
  +Cōn·iciō+, hurl.
  +Dē·iciō+, throw down from.
  +Dē·iectus+, slope.
  +Inter·iciō+, place between.
  +Prō·iciō+, hurl.
  +Re·iciō+, hurl back.
  +Iaceō+, lie.

    IC-, AIC-, like.
  +Aequāl·iter+, evenly.
  +Ad·aequō+, equal.
  +In·īquus+, unfavorable.
  +In·īquitās+, inequality.

    IV-, IVG-, bind, yoke.
  +Iugum+, ridge.
  +Con·iungō+, join together.
  +Cūnctus+ [for _cōn·iūnctus_], all.
  +Iūs+, right.
  +Iūstitia+, justice.
  +Con·iūrō+, conspire.
  +In·iūria+, wrong.
  +Iū·dicō+, judge.
  +Iubeō+, order.
  +Iūxtā+ [for _iūgistā_], close by.

    LAG-, loose.
  +Re·languēscō+, lose energy.
  +Lassitūdō+, exhaustion.
  +Laxō+, widen.

    1. LEG-, LIG-, gather.
  +Dē·ligō+, choose.
  +Dī·ligen·ter+ [for _dis·ligent·ter_], scrupulously.
  +In·dī·ligen·ter+, carelessly.
  +Ē·ligō+, choose.
  +Intel·legō+, understand.
  +Legiō+, legion.
  +Legiōnārius+, of a legion.

    2. LEG-, run, spring.
  +Levis+ [for _legvis_], light.
  +Levitās+, lightness.
  +Longus+, long.
  +Longē+, far.

    3. LEG-, lie, be fixed.
  +Lēx+, law.
  +Lēgātus+, envoy.
  +Lēgātiō+, embassy.

    LI-, pour, smear.
  +Littera+, written character.
  +Dē·leō+, destroy.

    LIB-, desire.
  +Līberī+, children (the free).
  +Līberāl·iter+, generously.

    LIC-, LIQV-, let, leave.
  +Pol·liceor+ [for _prō·liceor_], promise.
  +Re·linquō+, leave behind.
  +Re·liquus+, remaining.

    1. MA-, MAN-, measure.
  +Manus+, hand.
  +Man·dō+ [for _manus·dō_], commission.
  +Mani·pulus+, handful, maniple.
  +Mān·suētūdō+, gentleness.
  +Dī·mētior+, measure out.
  +Mōs+, custom.

    2. MA-, MAD-, measure, moderate.
  +Modus+, manner.
  +Modo+, only.
  +Com·modē (conm-)+, easily.
  +Ad·com·modō (acconm-)+, fit.

    MAC-, MAG-, big.
  +Magis+ [for _magius_], more.
  +Māximē+, most.
  +Māgnus+, great.
  +Māgnitūdō+, greatness.
  +Māior+ [for _magior_], greater.
  +Magistrātus+, office.
  +Molestē+, in a troublesome manner.

    MAL-, crush, grind.
  +Male·ficium+, outrage.
  +Mulier+, woman.

    1. MAN-, MEN-, man, mind, stay.
  +Moneō+, advise.
  +Dē·mōnstrō+, point out.
  +Clē·mentia+, kindness.

    2. MAN-, MI-, small, less.
  +Minor+, smaller.
  +Minus+, less.
  +Minimē+, least.
  +Ad·ministrō+, execute.

    MĪL-, associate.
  +Mīlle+, thousand.
  +Mīles+, soldier.
  +Mīlitāris+, of war.

    MIS-, wretched.
  +Miser+, wretched.
  +Miseri·cordia+, pity.

    MIT-, send, throw.
  +Mittō+, send.
  +Ā·mittō+, lose.
  +Com·mittō (conm-)+, join together.
  +Dī·mittō+, despatch.
  +Ē·mittō+, let fly.
  +Inter·mittō+, halt.
  +Intrō·mittō+, send in.
  +O·mittō+ [for _ob·mittō_], neglect.
  +Per·mittō+, grant.
  +Prae·mittō+, send in advance.
  +Re·mittō+, send back.
  +Sub·mittō+, send as aid.

    1. MV-, MOV-, move.
  +Moveō+, move.
  +Com·moveō+, startle.
  +Per·moveō+, rouse.
  +Prō·moveō+, move forward.
  +Mōbilitās+, nimbleness.
  +Com·mūtātiō+, change.

    2. MV-, shut, fasten.
  +Com·mūnis (conm-)+, common.
  +Moenia+, walls.
  +Mūniō+, fortify.
  +Circum·mūniō+, blockade.
  +Mūnīmentum+, fortification.
  +Mūnītiō+, fortification.
  +Mūrus+ [old _moerus_], wall.

    NA-, no.
  +Nē+, that not, lest.
  +Ne·que+, and not.
  +Nē·ve+ or +Neu+, and that not.
  +Ni·hil+, nothing.
  +Ni·si+ [for _nē·si_], if not.
  +Nōn+ [for _ne·oenum (ūnum)_], not.
  +Nōn·dum+, not yet.
  +Quīn+ [for _quī·nē_], but that.

    1. NEC-, NOC-, kill, hurt.
  +Inter·neciō+, annihilation.
  +Nox+, night.
  +Noctū+, by night.

    2. NEC-, bind.
  +Necessitās+, necessity.
  +Necessārius+, necessary.

    NV-, now (pronominal stem).
  +Noster+, our.
  +Nunc+ [for _num·ce_], now.
  +Novus+, new, fresh.
  +Nūntius+ [for _noventius_, from obs. _noveō_, from _novus_],
      messenger.
  +Nūntiō+, report.
  +Re·nūntiō+, report.

    OL-, OR-, grow, rise.
  +Orior+, arise.
  +Ad·orior+, assault.
  +Ōrdō+, order.

    PA-, feed.
  +Pater+, father.
  +Patrius+, ancestral.
  +Pābulum+, fodder.

    PAC-, PAG-, PVG-, fix, peg.
  +Pāx+, peace.
  +Pācō+, subdue.

  +Pūgnō+, fight.
  +Ex·pūgnō+, storm.
  +Op·pūgnō (obp-)+, assault.
  +Op·pūgnātiō (obp-)+, assault.
  +Prō·pūgnō+, defend.

    PAL-, PEL-, PVL-, drive, scatter.
  +Pellō+, drive.
  +Ad·pellō (app-)+, accost.
  +Com·pellō (conp-)+, drive together.
  +Ex·pellō+, drive out.
  +Im·pellō (inp-)+, incite.
  +Re·pellō+, drive back.

    1. PAR-, POR-, PER-, through, far, reach, try.
  +Pār+, equal.
  +Per+, through.
  +Ex·perior+, test.
  +Perīclitor+, test.
  +Perīculum+, danger.
  +Porta+, gate.
  +Portō+, bear.
  +Op·portūnus (obp-)+, suitable.
  +Paulis·per+, for a short time.

    2. PAR-, POR-, part, breed.
  +Parātus+, ready.
  +Com·parō (conp-)+, get ready.
  +Pro·perō+, hasten.
  +Im·perātor (inp-)+, commander.
  +Im·perō (inp-)+, command.
  +Im·perium (inp-)+, command.
  +A·pertus+ [for _ab·partus_], open.
  +Re·periō+, find.
  +Pars+, portion.
  +Partim+, partly.
  +O·portet+ [for _ob·portet_], is necessary.

    PARC-, PLEC-, bind, weave, fold.
  +Du·plex+, two-fold.
  +Sup·plex (subp-)+, suppliant.
  +Sup·plicātiō (subp-)+, thanksgiving.

  +Prope+, near [with metathesis of _r_ and change of _c_ to _p_.
      Cf. roots SAC and SCAL].
  +Proximus+ [_superl._ of _propior_], nearest.
  +Proximē+, last.
  +Propīnquus+, near.
  +Propīnquitās+, proximity.
  +Ad·propīnquō (app-)+, approach.
  +Propter+, near, on account of.
  +Propter·eā+, for the reason (that).

    1. PAT-, go.
  +Passus+, step.
  +Pōns+, bridge.

    2. PAT-, PAD-, spread, open.
  +Pateō+, extend.
  +Pate·faciō+, open.
  +Pandō+, extend.

    PAV-, little.
  +Paucus+, few.
  +Parvulus+, slight.
  +Paulum+, a little.
  +Paulō+, a little.
  +Paululum+, very slightly.
  +Paulātim+, gradually.
  +Paulis·per+, for a short time.

    PED-, tread.
  +Pēs+, foot.
  +Pedĕs+, foot-soldier.
  +Pedester+, of infantry.
  +Ex·pedītus+, unencumbered.
  +Im·pediō (inp-)+, hinder.
  +Im·pedīmenta (inp-)+, baggage.

  +Op·pidum+ [for _ob-pedum_], town.
  +Op·pidānus (obp-)+, townsman.

    PET-, fly.
  +Petō+, seek.
  +Im·petus (inp-)+, charge.

        PIS-, crush.
  +Pīlum+ [for _pislum_], spear.
  +Prīmi·pīlus+, first centurion of the _triarii_.

    PLAT-, spread, flat.
  +Latus+ [for _platus_], side.
  +Plānitiēs+ [for _platnitiēs_], plain.

    PLE-, PLO-, PLV-, fill.
  +Com·pleō (conp-)+, fill.
  +Plērus·que+, the most of.
  +Plūs+, more.
  +Plūrimum+, most.
  +Com·plūrēs (conp-)+, many.

  +Mani·pulus+, maniple.
  +Am·plius+, more.
  +Ampli·ficō+, enlarge.
  +?Pellis+, skin.
  +Populus+, people.
  +Pūblicus+ [for _populicus_], belonging to the state.

    PLV-, PLOV-, wash, flow.
  +Ex·plōrō+ [for _ex·ploverō_], reconnoitre.
  +Ex·plōrātor+, scout.

    POS-, behind.
  +Post+, after.
  +Post·eā+, afterwards.
  +Post·quam+, after.
  +Postrī·diē+ [for _posterō diē_], next day.

    POT-, master.
  +Potius+, rather.
  +Pos·sum+ [for _potis sum_], be able, can.
  +Potēns+, able.
  +Potestās+, power.
  +Potior+, gain.
  +Im·petrō (inp-)+, obtain.

    PREC-, pray.
  +Dē·precor+, petition against.
  +Poscō+ [for _porcscō_], demand.
  +Postulō+, demand.

    PRO-, PRI-, PRAE-, before.
  +Prō+, before.
  +Prior+, preceding.
  +Prius·quam+, sooner than.
  +Prīs·tinus+ [for _prius·tinus_], former.
  +Prīmus+, first.
  +Prīmum+, in the first place.
  +Prīmō+, in the first place.
  +Prīn·ceps+ [for _prīmi·ceps_], leader.
  +Prīmi·pīlus+, first centurion of the _triarii_.
  +Prae+, before.

    RA-, join, count.
  +Ratiō+, reason.
  +Rēs+, thing.

    RAP-, RVP-, snatch, break.
  +Dī·ripiō+ [for _dis·ripiō_], sack.
  +Ē·ruptiō+, sally.
  +Rūpēs+, cliff.

    REG-, RIG-, stretch, guide.
  +Por·rigō+ [for _prō·regō_], stretch out.
  +Regiō+, direction.
  +Rēx+, ruler.
  +Rēgnum+, control.

    1. SA-, SI-, sow, strow, sift.
  +Pōnō+ [for _port·(prō) sinō_], place.
  +Dē·pōnō+, put off.
  +Prō·pōnō+, display.

    2. SA-, SIM-, together, like.
  +Singulī+, one at a time.
  +Singulāris+, extraordinary.
  +Simul+, at the same time.
  +Cōn·similis+, altogether like.

    3. SA-, pronominal stem.
  +Sī·c+ [for _sī·ce_], so.
  +I·pse+, self.

    1. SAC-, SAG-, fasten.
  +Sagittārius+, archer.
  +Saepēs+ [with _p_ for _c_], hedge.

    2. SAC-, SEC-, SCĪD-, CĪD-, split.
  +Saxum+, rock.
  +Sectiō+, booty.
  +Scientia+, knowledge.
  +Inter·scindō+, cut off.
  +Con·cīdō+, cut to pieces.
  +In·cīdō+, cut into.
  +Oc·cīdō+, kill.

    3. SAC-, show.
  +Sīgnum+, signal.
  +Sīgni·fer+, standard-bearer.
  +Sīgni·ficō+, announce.
  +Sīgni·ficātiō+, signal.
  +Īn·sīgne+, sign.

    SAL-, SER-, save.
  +Salūs+, safety.
  +Sōlus+, alone.
  +Sōlum+, only.
  +Solli·citō (sōli)+, stir up.
  +Servō+, keep.
  +Cōn·servō+, preserve.

    SCAD-, CAD-, cover.
  +Castra+, camp.
  +Castellum+, redoubt.

    SCAL-, SCAR- (with _p_ for _c_, SPOL-), scrape.
  +Calamitās+, [for _scalamitās_], disaster.
  +Dē·spoliō+, deprive.
  +?Populor+, +Dē·populor+, ravage.

    SCAND-, climb.
  +A·scendō (adsc-)+, mount.
  +A·scēnsus (adsc-)+, ascent.

    SCARP-, SCALP-, cut, scratch.
  +Scrībō+, write.
  +Cōn·scrībō+, enroll.
  +Prae·scrībō+, dictate.

    SCV-, CV-, cover, hide.
  +Scūtum+, shield.
  +Custōdia+, guard.

    SEC-, follow.
  +Sequor+, follow.
  +Cōn·sequor+, attain.
  +Īn·sequor+, follow up.
  +Prō·sequor+, pursue.
  +Sub·sequor+, follow closely.
  +Secundus+, favorable.
  +Secundum+, according to.
  +Con-+ [for _scom-_], with.
  +Cum+, with.
  +Cōpia+ [for _com·opia_], supply.
  +Con·trā+, against.
  +Con·trārius+, opposite.

    SED-, SID-, sit.
  +Pos·sideō+ [for _prō·sideo_], own.
  +Īn·sidiae+, stratagem.
  +Ob·sĕs+, hostage.
  +Prae·sidium+, garrison.
  +Sub·sidium+, assistance.
  +Super·sedeō+, omit.
  +Cōn·sīdō+, settle.

    SEN-, old.
  +Senātor+, elder, senator.
  +Senātus+, senate.

    SENT-, feel.
  +Sententia+, opinion.
  +Cōn·sentiō+, agree.
  +Cōn·sēnsus+, agreement.

    1. SER-, SVAR-, string, bind.
  +Dē·serō+, abandon.
  +Prae·sertim+, especially.
  +Servitūs+, slavery.

    2. SER-, SVAL-, bright.
  +Sōl+, sun.
  +Silva+, forest.
  +Silvestris+, wooded.

    1. SMAR-, MAR-, think.
  +Mora+, delay.
  +Moror+, delay.

  +Memoria+, remembrance.
  +Com·memorō (conm-)+, mention.

    2. SMAR-, MER-, ascribe.
  +Meritum+, merit.
  +Mercātor+, trader.

    SOVO-, SVO-, own.
  +Suī+, of himself, _etc._
  +Suus+, his, _etc._
  +Cōn·suēscō+, be accustomed.
  +Cōn·suētūdō+, custom.
  +Mān·suētūdō+, gentleness.

  +Sed+, but.
  +?Sī+, if.
  +?Si·ne+, without.
  +?Ni·si+, if not.

    SPA-, PA-, draw, stretch.
  +Spatium+, space.
  +Spēs+, hope.
  +Dē·spērō+, give up hope.

  +?Studeō+, strive after.
  +?Studium+, eagerness.

    SPEC-, see, spy.
  +Cōn·spiciō+, espy.
  +Per·spiciō+, ascertain.
  +Re·spiciō+, look back.
  +Ex·spectō+, await.
  +Cōn·spicor+, espy.
  +Speciēs+, form.
  +Speculātor+, spy.
  +Cōn·spectus+, sight.
  +Dē·spectus+, view downward.
  +Prō·spectus+, view forward.

    STA-, stand, set.
  +Cōn·stanter+, uniformly.
  +Īn·stō+, press forward.
  +Prae·stō+, excel, show.
  +Cōn·sistō+, take position.
  +Dē·sistō+, stop.
  +Īn·sistō+, take a stand.
  +Re·sistō+, resist.
  +Statuō+, determine.
  +Cōn·stituō+, determine.
  +Statim+, at once.
  +Statiō+, picket.
  +Statūra+, stature.

    STER-, STRA-, STLA-, strow, spread.
  +Lātus+ [old, _stlātus_], broad.
  +Lātitūdō+, width.

    STRV-, spread, heap.
  +Ex·struō+, erect.
  +Īn·struō+, arrange.

    1. TA-, TEN-, stretch.
  +Prīs·tinus+ [for _prius·tinus_], former.
  +Prō·tinus+, at once.
  +Tener+, tender.
  +Teneō+, hold.
  +Con·tineō+, restrain, keep.
  +Dis·tineō+, separate.
  +Ob·tineō+, hold.
  +Per·tineō+, extend to.
  +Re·tineō+, detain.
  +Sus·tineō+ [for _subs·tineō_], sustain.
  +Sus·tentō+ [for _subs·tentō_], hold out.
  +Tendō+, stretch.
  +Con·tendō+, hasten.
  +?Tempus+, time.

    2. TA-, pronominal stem, third person, demonstrative.
  +Tam+, so.
  +Tantus+, so great.
  +Tantulus+, so trifling.
  +Tamen+, still.
  +Tot·idem+, just as many.
  +Tum+, then.

  Also the final element in _au·tem, au·t, i·ta, i·ta·que, u·t_.

    TAG-, touch, seize.
  +At·tingō (adt-)+, touch.
  +Red·in·tegrō+, renew.

    TARC- (TARP-), TREP-, turn, twist.
  +Tormentum+, engine for hurling.
  +Turpitūdō+, disgrace.
  +Trabs+, beam.

    TEC-, TAX-, weave, arrange.
  +In·texō+, weave in.
  +Tēlum+ (for _teclum_), spear.

    TEM-, TAN-, cut.
  +Con·temptus+, contempt.
  +Con·tumēlia+, insult.

    TER-, TREM-, TERS-, shake, scare.
  +Dē·terreō+, prevent.
  +Per·terreō+, thoroughly frighten.
  +Terror+, fright.

    TV-, TVM-, TAV-, TO-, swell.
  +Tumulus+, mound.
  +Tumultus+, uproar.
  +Tōtus+, whole.

    TVR-, harry, crowd.
  +Per·turbō+, throw into confusion.
  +Prō·turbō+, drive off,
  +?Turris+, tower.

        VAG-, VEH-, move, carry.
  +Vēxillum+, flag.
  +Vēxō+, harass.

    1. VEL-, VAL-, VER-, cover, guard.
  +Vāllum+, rampart.
  +Inter·vāllum+, distance.
  +Vereor+, fear.

    2. VEL-, VOL-, tear, pluck.
  +Vulnus+, wound.
  +Vulnerō+, wound.

    VER-, say.
  +Verbum+, word.
  +Vērō+, in truth.

    VERG-, VRG-, VALG-, slope, press.
  +Vergō+, incline.
  +Urgeō+, press.
  +Vulgō (volgō)+, generally.

    VERT-, turn.
  +Ā·vertō+, turn away.
  +Con·vertō+, turn around.
  +Re·vertō+, return.
  +Re·vertor+, return.
  +Versō+, turn about, _pass._ dwell.
  +Ad·versus+, opposite.
  +Dī·versus+, turned away.
  +Intr·ōrsus+ [for _intrō·versus_], within.
  +R·ūrsus+ [for _re·vorsus_], again.
  +Trāns·versus+, at right-angles.
  +Ūni·versus+, all.

    VET-, VIT-, year, old.
  +In·veterāscō+, grow old in.
  +Vetō+, forbid.

    VI-, VIC-, twine.
  +Vīnea+, covered shed.
  +Vīnum+, wine.
  +Vīmen+, willow, withe.

    VIC-, conquer.
  +Vincō+, conquer.
  +Vīctor+, victorious.
  +Prō·vincia+, province.
  +Vix+, barely.

    VID-, see.
  +Videō+, see.
  +In·videō+, envy.
  +Prō·videō+, procure.
  +Prū·dentia+ [for _prō·videntia_], wisdom.
  +Im·prō·vīsō (inp-)+, unexpectedly.

    VIR-, man.
  +Vir+, man.
  +Virtūs+, valor.

    VOC-, VAG-, call.
  +Con·vocō+, call together.
  +Re·vocō+, call back.
  +Vōx+, voice.

    VOL-, will, wish.
  +Voluntās+, wish.
  +N·ōlō+ [for _nē·vōlō_], be unwilling.
  +Quam·vīs+, howsoever.

  +At+, but.
  { +At·que+, and.
  { +Āc+,
  +Et+, and.
  +Et·iam+, even.
  +Ad+, to.
  +Ap·ud+, among.

  +Ex+, +Ē+, from, out of.
  +Extrēmus+, furthest.

  +Locus+ [for _stlocus_], place.
  +Con·locō (coll-)+, place.

  +Multus+, much.
  +Multitūdō+, large number.

  +Proelium+, battle.
  +Proelior+, fight.

  +Superior+, higher.
  +Summus+ [for _supimus_], highest
  +Suprā+, above.
  +Superō+, overcome.

  +Tardus+, slow.
  +Tardō+, retard.

  +Trēs+, three.
  +Trī·duum+, three days’ time.
  +Tribūnus+, military tribune.
  +Tertius+, third.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errata (noted by transcriber)

Missing or incorrect punctuation in the vocabulary lists was silently
corrected when it did not affect meaning. Other errors are listed
below.

WILLIAM C. COLLAR, A.M.  [_. after C invisible_]

Chap. 25: et manipulos laxāre iūssit,  [iūssit.]

Notes:
  Chap. 6, Page 26:
  24. ... notwithstanding A. & G., p. 389, Rem.  [A. &. G.]
  Chap. 8, Line 7:
  ... Compare chap. 7, l. 8.  [chap 7]
  Chap. 26, Page 36:
  16. ... Compare +ab sinistra parte+, p. 35, l. 13
    [_text has “p. 23”, using chapter number in place of page number_]
  Chap. 33, Page 40:
  5. +ne quam ... iniūriam+: see p. 39, l. 28, and note
    [_note is to simplified text, Chap. 33, l. 5_]

Vocabulary:
  +Con·diciō+, -ōnis, F., [DĪC-, DIC-] [_hyphen after DIC missing_]
  +Molestē+, adv. [MAC-, MAG-]  [1 MAC-]
  +Proximē+ ..., _nearest; most recently  [most, recently]
  +Trāns·gredior+, 3 ... go over  [go, over]

Etymology:
  PED-, tread ... +Ex·pedītus+, unencumbered  [unemcumbered].






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gate to Cæsar, by William C. Collar

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GATE TO CÆSAR ***

***** This file should be named 29645-0.txt or 29645-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/6/4/29645/

Produced by Louise Hope, Ted Garvin and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
