The Project Gutenberg eBook of Society in America, Volume 1 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Society in America, Volume 1 (of 2)

Author: Harriet Martineau

Release date: July 22, 2016 [eBook #52621]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Julia Miller, Martin Pettit and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOCIETY IN AMERICA, VOLUME 1 (OF 2) ***

SOCIETY IN AMERICA


BY
HARRIET MARTINEAU,

AUTHOR OF "ILLUSTRATIONS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY."

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I. (of II)

NEW YORK
SAUNDERS AND OTLEY, ANN STREET,
AND CONDUIT STREET, LONDON.
1837.




INTRODUCTION.


"To seize a character, even that of one man, in its life and secret
mechanism, requires a philosopher; to delineate it with truth and
impressiveness is work for a poet. How then shall one or two sleek
clerical tutors, with here and there a tedium-stricken esquire, or
speculative half-pay captain, give us views on such a subject? How shall
a man, to whom all characters of individual men are like sealed books,
of which he sees only the title and the covers, decipher from his
four-wheeled vehicle, and depict to us, the character of a nation? He
courageously depicts his own optical delusions; notes this to be
incomprehensible, that other to be insignificant; much to be good, much
to be bad, and most of all indifferent; and so, with a few flowing
strokes, completes a picture, which, though it may not resemble any
possible object, his countrymen are to take for a national portrait. Nor
is the fraud so readily detected: for the character of a people has
such a complexity of aspect, that even the honest observer knows not
always, not perhaps after long inspection, what to determine regarding
it. From his, only accidental, point of view, the figure stands before
him like the tracings on veined marble,--a mass of mere random lines,
and tints, and entangled strokes, out of which a lively fancy may shape
almost _any_ image. But the image he brings with him is always the
readiest; this is tried; it answers as well as another; and a second
voucher now testifies its correctness. Thus each, in confident tones,
though it be with a secret misgiving, repeats his precursor; the
hundred-times-repeated comes in the end to be believed; the foreign
nation is now once for all understood, decided on, and registered
accordingly; and dunce the thousandth writes of it like dunce the
first."--_Edinburgh Review, No._ xlvi. p. 309.


This passage cannot but strike upon the heart of any traveller who
meditates giving to the world an account of the foreign country he has
visited. It is the mirror held up before his face; and he inevitably
feels himself, for the moment, "dunce the thousandth." For my own part,
I felt the truth contained in this picture so strongly, before I was
acquainted with the passage itself, that I had again and again put away
the idea of saying one word in print on the condition of society in the
United States. Whenever I encountered half-a-dozen irreconcilable, but
respectable opinions on a single point of political doctrine; whenever
half-a-dozen fair-seeming versions of a single fact were offered to me;
whenever the glow of pleasure at obtaining, by some trivial accident, a
piece of important knowledge passed into a throb of pain at the thought
of how much must remain concealed where a casual glimpse disclosed so
much; whenever I felt how I, with my pittance of knowledge and amidst my
glimmerings of conviction, was at the mercy of unmanageable
circumstances, wafted now here and now there, by the currents of
opinion, like one surveying a continent from a balloon, with only
starlight above him,--I was tempted to decline the task of generalising
at all from what I saw and heard. In the intervals, however, I felt that
this would be wrong. Men will never arrive at a knowledge of each other,
if those who have the opportunity of foreign observation refuse to
relate what they think they have learned; or even to lay before others
the materials from which they themselves hesitate to construct a theory,
or draw large conclusions.

In seeking for methods by which I might communicate what I have observed
in my travels, without offering any pretension to teach the English, or
judge the Americans, two expedients occurred to me; both of which I have
adopted. One is, to compare the existing state of society in America
with the principles on which it is professedly founded; thus testing
Institutions, Morals, and Manners by an indisputable, instead of an
arbitrary standard, and securing to myself the same point of view with
my readers of both nations.

In working according to this method, my principal dangers are two. I am
in danger of not fully apprehending the principles on which society in
the United States is founded; and of erring in the application to these
of the facts which came under my notice. In the last respect, I am
utterly hopeless of my own accuracy. It is in the highest degree
improbable that my scanty gleanings in the wide field of American
society should present a precisely fair sample of the whole. I can only
explain that I have spared no pains to discover the truth, in both
divisions of my task; and invite correction, in all errors of fact. This
I earnestly do; holding myself, of course, an equal judge with others on
matters of opinion.

My readers, on their part, will bear in mind that, in showing
discrepancies between an actual condition and a pure and noble theory
of society, I am not finding fault with the Americans, as for falling
behind the English, or the French, or any other nation. I decline the
office of censor altogether. I dare not undertake it. Nor will my
readers, I trust, regard the subject otherwise than as a compound of
philosophy and fact. If we can all, for once, allay our personal
feelings, dismiss our too great regard to mutual opinion, and put praise
and blame as nearly as possible out of the question, more that is
advantageous to us may perhaps be learned than by any invidious
comparisons and proud judgments that were ever instituted and
pronounced.

The other method by which I propose to lessen my own responsibility, is
to enable my readers to judge for themselves, better than I can for
them, what my testimony is worth. For this purpose, I offer a brief
account of my travels, with dates in full; and a report of the principal
means I enjoyed of obtaining a knowledge of the country.

At the close of a long work which I completed in 1834, it was thought
desirable that I should travel for two years. I determined to go to the
United States, chiefly because I felt a strong curiosity to witness the
actual working of republican institutions; and partly because the
circumstance of the language being the same as my own is very important
to one who, like myself, is too deaf to enjoy anything like an average
opportunity of obtaining correct knowledge, where intercourse is carried
on in a foreign language. I went with a mind, I believe, as nearly as
possible unprejudiced about America, with a strong disposition to admire
democratic institutions, but an entire ignorance how far the people of
the United States lived up to, or fell below, their own theory. I had
read whatever I could lay hold of that had been written about them; but
was unable to satisfy myself that, after all, I understood anything
whatever of their condition. As to knowledge of them, my mind was nearly
a blank: as to opinion of their state, I did not carry the germ of one.

I landed at New York on the 19th of September, 1834: paid a short visit
the next week to Paterson, in New Jersey, to see the cotton factories
there, and the falls of the Passaic; and passed through New York again
on my way to stay with some friends on the banks of the Hudson, and at
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. On the 6th of October, I joined some
companions at Albany, with whom I travelled through the State of New
York, seeing Trenton Falls, Auburn, and Buffalo, to the Falls of
Niagara. Here I remained nearly a week; then, after spending a few days
at Buffalo, I embarked on Lake Erie, landing in the back of
Pennsylvania, and travelling down through Meadville to Pittsburgh,
spending a few days at each place. Then, over the Alleghanies to
Northumberland, on the fork of the Susquehanna, the abode of Priestley
after his exile, and his burial place. I arrived at Northumberland on
the 11th of October, and left it, after visiting some villages in the
neighbourhood, on the 17th, for Philadelphia, where I remained nearly
six weeks, having very extensive intercourses with its various society.
My stay at Baltimore was three weeks, and at Washington five. Congress
was at that time in session, and I enjoyed peculiar opportunities of
witnessing the proceedings of the Supreme Court and both houses of
Congress. I was acquainted with almost every eminent senator and
representative, both on the administration and opposition sides; and was
on friendly and intimate terms with some of the judges of the Supreme
Court. I enjoyed the hospitality of the President, and of several of the
heads of departments: and was, like everybody else, in society from
morning till night of every day; as the custom is at Washington. One
day was devoted to a visit to Mount Vernon, the abode and burial-place
of Washington.

On the 18th of February I arrived at Montpelier, the seat of Mr. and
Mrs. Madison, with whom I spent two days, which were wholly occupied
with rapid conversation; Mr. Madison's share of which, various and
beautiful to a remarkable degree, will never be forgotten by me. His
clear reports of the principles and history of the Constitution of the
United States, his insight into the condition, his speculations on the
prospects of nations, his wise playfulness, his placid contemplation of
present affairs, his abundant household anecdotes of Washington,
Franklin, and Jefferson, were incalculably valuable and exceedingly
delightful to me.

The intercourse which I had with Chief Justice Marshall was of the same
character, though not nearly so copious. Nothing in either delighted me
more than their hearty admiration of each other, notwithstanding some
wide differences in their political views. They are both gone; and I now
deeply feel what a privilege it is to have known them.

From Mr. Madison's I proceeded to Charlottesville, and passed two days
amidst the hospitalities of the Professors of Jefferson's University,
and their families. I was astonished to learn that this institution had
never before been visited by a British traveller. I can only be sorry
for British travellers who have missed the pleasure. A few days more
were given to Richmond, where the Virginia legislature was in session;
and then ensued a long wintry journey though North and South Carolina to
Charleston, occupying from the 2nd to the 11th of March. The
hospitalities of Charleston are renowned; and I enjoyed them in their
perfection for a fortnight; and then a renewal of the same kind of
pleasures at Columbia, South Carolina, for ten days. I traversed the
southern States, staying three days at Augusta, Georgia, and nearly a
fortnight in and near Montgomery, Alabama; descending next the Alabama
river to Mobile. After a short stay there, and a residence of ten days
at New Orleans, I went up the Mississippi and Ohio to the mouth of the
Cumberland river, which I ascended to Nashville, Tennessee. I visited
the Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, and spent three weeks at Lexington. I
descended the Ohio to Cincinnati; and after staying there ten days,
ascended the river again, landing in Virginia, visiting the Hawk's Nest,
Sulphur Springs, Natural Bridge, and Weyer's Cave, arriving at New York
again on the 14th of July, 1835. The autumn was spent among the villages
and smaller towns of Massachusetts, in a visit to Dr. Channing in Rhode
Island, and in an excursion to the mountains of New Hampshire and
Vermont. The winter was passed in Boston, with the exception of a trip
to Plymouth, for "Forefather's Day." In the Spring I spent seven weeks
in New York; and a month in a farmhouse at Stockbridge, Massachusetts;
making an excursion, meanwhile, to Saratoga and Lake George. My last
journey was with a party of friends, far into the west, visiting Niagara
again, proceeding by Lake Erie to Detroit, and across the territory of
Michigan. We swept round the southern extremity of Lake Michigan to
Chicago: went a long day's journey down into the prairies, back to
Chicago, and by the Lakes Michigan, Huron, and St. Clair to Detroit,
visiting Mackinaw by the way. We landed from Lake Erie at Cleveland,
Ohio, on the 13th of July; and travelled through the interior of Ohio
till we joined the river at Beaver. We visited Rapp's Settlement at
Economy, on the Ohio, and returned to New York from Pittsburgh, by the
canal route through Pennsylvania, and the rail-road over the
Alleghanies. I sailed from New York for England on the 1st of August,
1836, having then been absent just two years.

In the course of this tour, I visited almost every kind of institution.
The prisons of Auburn, Philadelphia, and Nashville: the insane and other
hospitals of almost every considerable place: the literary and
scientific institutions; the factories of the north; the plantations of
the south; the farms of the west. I lived in houses which might be
called palaces, in log-houses, and in a farm-house. I travelled much in
wagons, as well as stages; also on horseback, and in some of the best
and worst of steam-boats. I saw weddings, and christenings; the
gatherings of the richer at watering places, and of the humbler at
country festivals. I was present at orations, at land sales, and in the
slave market. I was in frequent attendance on the Supreme Court and the
Senate; and witnessed some of the proceedings of state legislatures.
Above all, I was received into the bosom of many families, not as a
stranger, but as a daughter or a sister. I am qualified, if any one is,
to testify to the virtues and the peace of the homes of the United
States; and let it not be thought a breach of confidence, if I should be
found occasionally to have spoken of these out of the fulness of my
heart.

It would be nearly impossible to relate whom I knew, during my travels.
Nearly every eminent man in politics, science and literature, and
almost every distinguished woman, would grace my list. I have respected
and beloved friends of each political party; and of nearly every
religious denomination; among slave-holders, colonizationists, and
abolitionists; among farmers, lawyers, merchants, professors, and
clergy. I travelled among several tribes of Indians; and spent months in
the southern States, with negroes ever at my heels.

Such were my means of information. With regard to my power of making use
of them, I have but a few words to say.

It has been frequently mentioned to me that my being a woman was one
disadvantage; and my being previously heard of, another. In this I do
not agree.

I am sure, I have seen much more of domestic life than could possibly
have been exhibited to any gentleman travelling through the country. The
nursery, the boudoir, the kitchen, are all excellent schools in which to
learn the morals and manners of a people: and, as for public and
professional affairs,--those may always gain full information upon such
matters, who really feel an interest in them,--be they men or women. No
people in the world can be more frank, confiding and affectionate, or
more skilful and liberal in communicating information, than I have ever
found the Americans to be. I never asked in vain; and I seldom had to
ask at all; so carefully were my inquiries anticipated, and my aims so
completely understood. I doubt whether a single fact that I wished to
learn, or any doctrine that I desired to comprehend, was ever kept from
me because I was a woman.

As for the other objection, I can only state my belief, that my friends
and I found personal acquaintance so much pleasanter than any previous
knowledge by hearsay, that we always forgot that we had heard of each
other before. It would be preposterous to suppose that, received as I
was into intimate confidence, any false appearances could be kept up on
account of any preconceptions that could have been entertained of me.

I laboured under only one peculiar disadvantage, that I am aware of; but
that one is incalculable. I mean my deafness. This does not endanger the
accuracy of my information, I believe, as far as it goes; because I
carry a trumpet of remarkable fidelity; an instrument, moreover, which
seems to exert some winning power, by which I gain more in
_tête-à-têtes_ than is given to people who hear general conversation.
Probably its charm consists in the new feeling which it imparts of ease
and privacy in conversing with a deaf person. However this may be, I can
hardly imagine fuller revelations to be made in household intercourse
than my trumpet brought to me. But I am aware that there is no
estimating the loss, in a foreign country, from not hearing the casual
conversation of all kinds of people, in the streets, stages, hotels, &c.
I am aware that the lights which are thus gathered up by the traveller
for himself are often far more valuable than the most elaborate accounts
of things offered to him with an express design. This was my peculiar
disadvantage. It could not be helped; and it cannot be explained away. I
mention it, that the value of my testimony may be lowered according to
the supposed worth of this circumstance.

Much is often said about the delicacy to be observed, in the act of
revealing the history of one's travels, towards the hosts and other
friends of the traveller who have reposed confidence in him. The rule
seems to me a very plain one, which reconciles truth, honour and
utility. My rule is to speak of the public acts of public persons,
precisely as if I had known them only in their public character. This
may be sometimes difficult, and sometimes painful, to the writer; but it
leaves no just cause of complaint to any one else. Moreover, I hold it
allowable and necessary to make use of opinions and facts offered in
fire-side confidence, as long as no clue is offered by which they may be
traced back to any particular fire-side. If any of my American friends
should find in this book traces of old conversations and incidents, let
them keep their own counsel, and be assured that the conversation and
facts remain private between them and me. Thus far, all is safe; and
further than this, no honourable person would wish to go.

This is not the place in which to speak of my obligations or of my
friendships. Those who know best what I have in my heart to say meet me
here under a new relation. In these pages, we meet as writer and
readers. I would only entreat them to bear this distinction in mind, and
not to measure my attachment to themselves by anything this book may
contain about their country and their nation. The bond which unites us
bears no relation to clime, birth-place, or institutions. In as far as
our friendship is faithful, we are fellow-citizens of another and a
better country than theirs or mine.




CONTENTS.

VOL. I.

                                                 _Page_
INTRODUCTION                                          i


PART I.

POLITICS                                              1

CHAPTER I.

PARTIES                                               8

CHAPTER II.

APPARATUS OF GOVERNMENT                              32
  SECTION I.--The General Government                 35
         II.--The Executive                          52
        III.--The State Governments                  64

CHAPTER III.

MORALS OF POLITICS                                   82
  SECTION I.--Office                                 84
         II.--Newspapers                            109
        III.--Apathy in Citizenship                 115
         IV.--Allegiance to Law                     120
          V.--Sectional Prejudice                   135
         VI.--Citizenship of People of Colour       144
        VII.--Political Non-Existence of Women      148


PART II.

ECONOMY                                             155
   Solitaires                                       162
   Springs of Virginia                              175
   New England Farm-house                           193
   West Country Life                                201
   Township of Gloucester                           205
   South Country Life                               212
   Picture of Michigan                              232
   The Northern Lakes                               270

CHAPTER I.

AGRICULTURE                                         291
  SECTION I.--Disposal of Land                      318
         II.--Rural Labour                          338




SOCIETY IN AMERICA




PART I.

POLITICS.

     " ... Those unalterable relations which Providence has ordained
     that everything should bear to every other. These relations, which
     are truth itself, the foundation of virtue, and consequently, the
     only measures of happiness, should be likewise the only measures by
     which we should direct our reasoning. To these we should conform in
     good earnest, and not think to force nature, and the whole order of
     her system, by a compliance with our pride and folly, to conform to
     our artificial regulations. It is by a conformity to this method we
     owe the discovery of the few truths we know, and the little liberty
     and rational happiness we enjoy." _Burke._


Mr. Madison remarked to me, that the United States had been "useful in
proving things before held impossible." Of such proofs, he adduced
several. Others, which he did not mention, have since occurred to me;
and, among them, the pursuit of the _à priori_ method in forming a
constitution:--the _à priori_ method, as it is styled by its enemies,
though its advocates, with more reason, call it the inductive method.
Till the formation of the government of the United States, it had been
generally supposed, and it is so still by the majority of the old world,
that a sound theory of government can be constructed only out of the
experience of man in governments; the experience mankind has had of
despotisms, oligarchies, and the mixtures of these with small portions
of democracy. But the essential condition of the fidelity of the
inductive method is, that all the elements of experience should be
included. If, in this particular problem, of the true theory of
government, we take all experience of government, and leave out all
experience of man, except in his hitherto governing or governed state,
we shall never reach a philosophical conclusion. The true application of
the inductive method here is to test a theory of government deduced from
the principles of human nature, by the results of all governments of
which mankind has had experience. No narrower basis will serve for such
an induction. Such a method of finding a good theory of government was
considered impossible, till the United States "proved" it.

This proof can never be invalidated by anything that can now happen in
the United States. It is common to say "Wait; these are early days. The
experiment will fail yet." The experiment of the particular constitution
of the United States may fail; but the great principle which, whether
successfully or not, it strives to embody,--the capacity of mankind for
self-government,--is established for ever. It has, as Mr. Madison said,
proved a thing previously held impossible. If a revolution were to take
place to-morrow in the United States, it remains an historical fact
that, for half a century, a people has been self-governed; and, till it
can be proved that the self-government is the cause of the instability,
no revolution, or series of revolutions, can tarnish the lustre, any
more than they can impair the soundness of the principle that mankind
are capable of self-government. The United States have indeed been
useful in proving these two things, before held impossible; the finding
a true theory of government, by reasoning from the principles of human
nature, as well as from the experience of governments; and the capacity
of mankind for self-government.

It seems strange that while politics are unquestionably a branch of
moral science, bearing no other relation than to the duty and happiness
of man, the great principles of his nature should have been neglected by
politicians--with the exception of his love of power and desire of
gain,--till a set of men assembled in the State House at Philadelphia,
in the eighteenth century, and there throned a legitimate political
philosophy in the place of a deposed king. The _rationale_ of all
preceding governments had been, "men love power, therefore there must be
punishments for rulers who, having already much, would seize more. Men
desire gain; therefore there must be punishments for those, rulers or
ruled, who would appropriate the gains of others." The _rationale_ of
the new and "impossible" government is "that all men are created equal;
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable lights;
that among them are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to
secure those rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving
their just powers from the consent of the governed."[1] This last
recognizes, over and above what the former admits, the great principles
of indefeasible rights; human equality in relation to these; and the
obligation of universal justice.

These, then, are the principles which the statesmen in the State House
at Philadelphia announced as the soul of their embryo institutions; and
the rule through which they were to work was no less than that golden
one which seems to have been, by some unhappy chance, omitted in the
bibles of other statesmen--"Do unto others as ye would that they should
do unto you." Perhaps it may be reserved for their country to prove yet
one more impossible thing--that men can live by the rule which their
Maker has given them to live by. Meanwhile, every true citizen of that
country must necessarily be content to have his self-government tried by
the test of these principles, to which, by his citizenship, he has
become a subscriber. He will scorn all comparisons, instituted as a test
of merit, between his own government and those of other countries, which
he must necessarily consider as of narrower scope and lower aim. Whether
such comparisons be instituted abroad in a spirit of contempt, or at
home in a spirit of complacency, he will regard them equally as
irrelevant, and proving nothing to the best purposes of true citizens.
He will disdain every test but that furnished by the great principles
propounded in the State House at Philadelphia; and he will quarrel with
no results fairly brought out by such a test, whether they inspire him
with shame, or with complacency. In either case, he will be animated by
them.

If the politics of a country be really derived from fundamental
principles of human nature and morals, the economy, manners, and
religion of that country must be designed to harmonise with these
principles. The same test must be applicable to all. The inalienable
right of all the human race to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness, must control the economical, as well as the political
arrangements of a people; and the law of universal justice must regulate
all social intercourse, and direct all administration of religion.

Politics are morals, all the world over; that is, politics universally
implicate the duty and happiness of man. Every branch of morals is, and
ought to be considered, a universal concern. Under despotic governments,
there is a pretension, more or less sincere, on the part of the rulers,
to moral regards; but from these the bulk of the people are, by common
consent, cut off. If the bulk of the people saw the truth, that the
principles of politics affect them,--are the message of their Maker as
principles are to them, as well as to their rulers, they would become
moral agents in regard to politics, and despotism would be at an end. As
it is, they pay their taxes, and go out to war when they are bid, are
thankful when they are left unmolested by their government, and sorry or
angry when they feel themselves oppressed; and there they end. It is
owing to their ignorance of politics being morals--_i. e._ matters of
equal concern to all--that this truth is not made manifest in action in
every country on the globe that has any government at all.

The same is the case of the unrepresented under governments which are
not called despotic. According to the principles professed by the United
States, there is there a rectification of this mighty error--a
correction of this grand oversight. In that self-governing nation, all
are held to have an equal interest in the principles of its
institutions, and to be bound in equal duty to watch their workings.
Politics there are universal duty. None are exempted from obligation but
the unrepresented; and they, in theory, are none. However various may be
the tribes of inhabitants in those States, whatever part of the world
may have been their birth-place, or that of their fathers, however
broken may be their language, however noble or servile their
employments, however exalted or despised their state, all are declared
to be bound together by equal political obligation, as firmly as under
any other law of personal or social duty. The president, the senator,
the governor, may take upon himself some additional responsibility, as
the physician and lawyer do in other departments of office; but they
are under precisely the same political obligation as the German settler,
whose axe echoes through the lonely forest; and the Southern planter,
who is occupied with his hospitalities; and the New England merchant,
whose thoughts are on the sea; and the Irishman, in his shanty on the
canal-bank; and the negro, hoeing cotton in the hot field, or basking
away his sabbath on the shore of the Mississippi. Genius, knowledge,
wealth, may in other affairs set a man above his fellows; but not in
this. Weakness, ignorance, poverty may exempt a man from other
obligations; but not from this. The theory of the government of the
United States has grasped and embodied the mighty principle, that
politics are morals;--that is, a matter of universal and equal concern.
We shall have to see whether this principle is fully acted out.

Implicated with this is the theory, that the majority will be in the
right, both as to the choice of principles which are to govern
particular cases, and the agents who are to work them. This theory,
obviously just as it appears, as long as it is applied to matters of
universal and equal concern, cannot be set aside without overthrowing
all with which it is involved. We shall have to see, also, whether this
principle is effectually carried out.

Implicated with this, again, is the principle that a mutable, or rather
elastic form, must be given to every institution. "The majority are in
the right." Such is the theory. Few individuals of this majority can act
for longer than two-score years and ten; few for so long. No one can
suppose that his successor will think or feel as he does, however strict
may be the regard of each to the fundamental principles which are to
regulate his citizenship. It is absolutely necessary, to secure
permanence to the recognition of those principles, that there should be
liberty to change the form which contains them. Else, in the endless
variety of human views and interests, there is danger lest men, being
prohibited from producing a correspondence between the principles they
recognise, and the forms they desire, should, because interdicted from
outward change, gradually alter the spirit of their government. In such
a case, men would be some time in discovering that the fair body of
their constitution has become possessed, while they had supposed her
inspired: and, to pass over the mischiefs which might happen during the
period of her possession, the work of exorcism would be difficult and
perilous.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Declaration of Independence.




CHAPTER I.

PARTIES.

     "For these are the men that, when they have played their parts, and
     had their exits, must step out, and give the moral of their scenes,
     and deliver unto posterity an inventory of their virtues and
     vices."

     _Sir Thomas Browne._


The first gentleman who greeted me on my arrival in the United States, a
few minutes after I had landed, informed me without delay, that I had
arrived at an unhappy crisis; that the institutions of the country would
be in ruins before my return to England; that the levelling spirit was
desolating society; and that the United States were on the verge of a
military despotism. This was so very like what I had been accustomed to
hear at home, from time to time, since my childhood, that I was not
quite so much alarmed as I might have been without such prior
experience. It was amusing too to find America so veritably the daughter
of England.

I looked around me carefully, in all my travels, till I reached
Washington, but could see no signs of despotism; even less of military.
Except the officers and cadets at West Point, and some militia on a
training day at Saugerties, higher up on the Hudson, I saw nothing that
could be called military; and officers, cadets, and militia, appeared
all perfectly innocent of any design to seize upon the government. At
Washington, I ventured to ask an explanation from one of the most
honoured statesmen now living; who told me, with a smile, that the
country had been in "a crisis" for fifty years past; and would be for
fifty years to come.

This information was my comfort, from day to day, till I became
sufficiently acquainted with the country to need such support no longer.
Mournful predictions, like that I have quoted, were made so often, that
it was easy to learn how they originated.

In the United States, as elsewhere, there are, and have always been, two
parties in politics, whom it is difficult to distinguish on paper, by a
statement of their principles, but whose course of action may, in any
given case, be pretty confidently anticipated. It is remarkable how
nearly their positive statements of political doctrine agree, while they
differ in almost every possible application of their common principles.
Close and continued observation of their agreements and differences is
necessary before the British traveller can fully comprehend their mutual
relation. In England, the differences of parties are so broad,--between
those who would have the people governed for the convenience of their
rulers; those who would have the many governed, for their good, by the
will of the few; and those who would have the people govern
themselves;--that it is, for some time, difficult to comprehend how
there should be party differences as wide in a country where the first
principle of government is that the people are to govern themselves. The
case, however, becomes clear in time: and, amidst a half century of
"crises," the same order and sequence become discernible which run
through the whole course of human affairs.

As long as men continue as differently organized as they now are, there
will be two parties under every government. Even if their outward
fortunes could be absolutely equalised, there would be, from individual
constitution alone, an aristocracy and a democracy in every land. The
fearful by nature would compose an aristocracy, the hopeful by nature a
democracy, were all other causes of divergence done away. When to these
constitutional differences are added all those outward circumstances
which go to increase the fear and the hope, the mutual misunderstandings
of parties are no longer to be wondered at. Men who have gained wealth,
whose hope is fulfilled, and who fear loss by change, are naturally of
the aristocratic class. So are men of learning, who, unconsciously
identifying learning and wisdom, fear the elevation of the ignorant to a
station like their own. So are men of talent, who, having gained the
power which is the fit recompense of achievement, dread the having to
yield it to numbers instead of desert. So are many more who feel the
almost universal fear of having to part with educational prejudices,
with doctrines with which honoured teachers nourished the pride of
youth, and prepossessions inwoven with all that has been to them most
pure, lofty, and graceful. Out of these a large aristocratic class must
everywhere be formed.

Out of the hopeful,--the rising, not the risen,--the aspiring, not the
satisfied,--must a still larger class be everywhere formed. It will
include all who have most to gain and least to lose; and most of those
who, in the present state of education, have gained their knowledge from
actual life, rather than, or as well as, from books. It will include the
adventurers of society, and also the philanthropists. It will include,
moreover,--an accession small in number, but inestimable in power,--the
men of genius. It is characteristic of genius to be hopeful and
aspiring. It is characteristic of genius to break up the artificial
arrangements of conventionalism, and to view mankind in true
perspective, in their gradations of inherent rather than of adventitious
worth. Genius is therefore essentially democratic, and has always been
so, whatever titles its gifted ones may have worn, or on whatever
subjects they may have exercised their gifts. To whatever extent men of
genius have been aristocratic, they have been so in spite of their
genius, not in consistency with it. The instances are so few, and their
deviations from the democratic principle so small, that men of genius
must be considered as included in the democratic class.

Genius being rare, and its claims but tardily allowed by those who have
attained greatness by other means, it seems as if the weight of
influence possessed by the aristocratic party,--by that party which,
generally speaking, includes the wealth, learning, and talents of the
country,--must overpower all opposition. If this is found not to be the
case, if it be found that the democratic party has achieved everything
that has been achieved since the United States' constitution began to
work, it is no wonder that there is panic in many hearts, and that I
heard from so many tongues of the desolations of the "levelling spirit,"
and the approaching ruin of political institutions.

These classes may be distinguished in another way. The description which
Jefferson gave of the federal and republican parties of 1799 applies to
the federal and democratic parties of this day, and to the aristocratic
and democratic parties of every time and country. "One," says Jefferson,
"fears most the ignorance of the people; the other, the selfishness of
rulers independent of them."

There is much reason in both these fears. The unreasonableness of party
lies in entertaining the one fear, and not the other. No argument is
needed to prove that rulers are prone to selfishness and narrowness of
views: and no one can have witnessed the injuries that the poor suffer
in old countries,--the education of hardship and insult that furnishes
them with their only knowledge of the highest classes, without being
convinced that their ignorance is to be feared;--their ignorance, not so
much of books as of liberty and law. In old countries, the question
remains open whether the many should, on account of their ignorance, be
kept still in a state of political servitude, as some declare; or
whether they should be gradually prepared for political freedom, as
others think, by an amelioration of their condition, and by being
educated in schools; or whether, as yet others maintain, the exercise of
political rights and duties be not the only possible political
education. In the New World, no such question remains to be debated. It
has no large, degraded, injured, dangerous (white) class who can afford
the slightest pretence for a panic-cry about agrarianism. Throughout the
prodigious expanse of that country, I saw no poor _men_, except a few
intemperate ones. I saw some very poor _women_; but God and man know
that the time has not come for women to make their injuries even heard
of. I saw no beggars but two professional ones, who are making their
fortunes in the streets of Washington. I saw no table spread, in the
lowest order of houses, that had not meat and bread on it. Every factory
child carries its umbrella; and pig-drivers wear spectacles. With the
exception of the foreign paupers on the seaboard, and those who are
steeped in sensual vice, neither of which classes can be politically
dangerous, there are none who have not the same interest in the security
of property as the richest merchant of Salem, or planter of Louisiana.
Whether the less wealthy class will not be the first to draw out from
reason and experience the true philosophy of property, is another
question. All we have to do with now is their equal interest with their
richer neighbours in the security of property, in the present state of
society. Law and order are as important to the man who holds land for
the subsistence of his family, or who earns wages that he may have land
of his own to die upon, as to any member of the president's cabinet.

Nor is there much more to fear from the ignorance of the bulk of the
people in the United States, than from their poverty. It is too true
that there is much ignorance; so much as to be an ever-present peril.
Though, as a whole, the nation is, probably, better informed than any
other entire nation, it cannot be denied that their knowledge is far
inferior to what their safety and their virtue require. But _whose_
ignorance is it? And ignorance of _what_? If the professors of colleges
have book-knowledge, which the owner of a log-house has not; the owner
of a log-house has very often, as I can testify, a knowledge of natural
law, political rights, and economical fact, which the college-professor
has not. I often longed to confront some of each class, to see whether
there was any common ground on which they could meet. If not, the one
might bring the charge of ignorance as justly as the other. If a common
ground could be discovered, it would have been in their equal relation
to the government under which they live: in which case, the natural
conclusion would be, that each understood his own interests best, and
neither could assume superiority over the other. The particular
ignorance of the countryman may expose him to be flattered and cheated
by an oratorical office-seeker, or a dishonest newspaper. But, on the
other hand, the professor's want of knowledge of the actual affairs of
the many, and his educational biases, are just as likely to cause him to
vote contrary to the public interest. No one who has observed society in
America will question the existence or the evil of ignorance there: but
neither will he question that such real knowledge as they have is pretty
fairly shared among them.

I travelled by wagon, with a party of friends, in the interior of Ohio.
Our driver must be a man of great and various knowledge, if he questions
all strangers as he did us, and obtains as copious answers. He told us
where and how he lived, of his nine children, of his literary daughters,
and the pains he was at to get books for them; and of his hopes from his
girl of fourteen, who writes poetry, which he keeps a secret, lest she
should be spoiled. He told us that he seldom lets his fingers touch a
novel, because the consequence always is that his business stands still
till the novel is finished; "and that doesn't suit." He recited to us,
Pope's "Happy the man whose wish and care," &c. saying that it suited
his idea exactly. He asked both the ladies present whether they had
written a book. Both had; and he carried away the titles, that he might
buy the books for his daughters. This man is fully informed of the value
of the Union, as we had reason to perceive; and it is difficult to see
why he is not as fit as any other man to choose the representatives of
his interests. Yet, here is a specimen of his conversation with one of
the ladies of the party.

"Was the book that you wrote on natural philosophy, madam?"

"No; I know nothing about natural philosophy."

"Hum! Because one lady has done that pretty well:--hit it!--Miss Porter,
you know."

"What Miss Porter?"

"She that wrote 'Thaddeus of Warsaw,' you know. She did it pretty well
there."

As an antagonist case, take the wailings of a gentleman of very
distinguished station in a highly aristocratic section of
society;--wailings over the extent of the suffrage.

"What an enormity it is that such a man as Judge ----, there, should
stand on no higher level in politics than the man that grooms his
horse!"

"Why should he? I suppose they have both got all they want,--full
representation: and they thus bear precisely the same relation to the
government."

"No; the judge seldom votes, because of his office: while his groom can,
perhaps, carry nineteen men to vote as he pleases. It is monstrous!"

"It seems monstrous that the judge should omit his political duty for
the sake of his office; and also that nineteen men should be led by one.
But limiting the suffrage would not mend the matter. Would it not do
better to teach all the parties their duty?"

Let who will choose between the wagon-driver and the scholar. Each will
vote according to his own views; and the event,--the ultimate
majority,--will prove which is so far the wiser.

The vagueness of the antagonism between the two parties is for some time
perplexing to the traveller in America; and he does not know whether to
be most amazed or amused at the apparent triviality of the circumstances
which arouse the strongest party emotions. After a while, a body comes
out of the mystery, and he grasps a substantial cause of dissension.
From the day when the first constitution was formed, there have been
alarmists, who talk of a "crisis:" and from the day when the second
began its operations, the alarm has, very naturally, taken its subject
matter from the failure of the first. The first general government came
to a stand through weakness. The entire nation kept itself in order till
a new one was formed and set to work. As soon as the danger was over,
and the nation proved, by the last possible test, duly convinced of the
advantages of public order, the timid party took fright lest the general
government should still not be strong enough; and this tendency, of
course, set the hopeful party to watch lest it should be made too
strong. The panic and antagonism were at their height in 1799.[2] A
fearful collision of parties took place, which ended in the
establishment of the hopeful policy, which has continued, with few
interruptions, since. The executive patronage was retrenched, taxes were
taken off, the people were re-assured, and all is, as yet, safe. While
the leaders of the old federal party retired to their Essex junto, and
elsewhere, to sigh for monarchy, and yearn towards England, the greater
number threw off their fears, and joined the republican party. There are
now very few left to profess the politics of the old federalists. I met
with only two who openly avowed their desire for a monarchy; and not
many more who prophesied one. But there still is a federal party, and
there ever will be. It is as inevitable that there will be always some
who will fear the too great strength of the state governments, as that
there will be many who will have the same fear about the general
government. Instead of seeing in this any cause for dismay, or even
regret, the impartial observer will recognise in this mutual
watchfulness the best security that the case admits of for the general
and state governments preserving their due relation to one another. No
government ever yet worked both well and indisputably. A pure despotism
works (apparently) indisputably; but the bulk of its subjects will not
allow that it works well, while it wrings their heads from their
shoulders, or their earnings from their hands. The government of the
United States is disputed at every step of its workings: but the bulk of
the people declare that it works well, while every man is his own
security for his life and property.

The extreme panic of the old federal party is accounted for, and almost
justified, when we remember, not only that the commerce of England had
penetrated every part of the country, and that great pecuniary interests
were therefore everywhere supposed to be at stake; but that
republicanism, like that which now exists in America, was a thing
unheard of--an idea only half-developed in the minds of those who were
to live under it. Wisdom may spring, full-formed and accomplished, from
the head of a god, but not from the brains of men. The Americans of the
Revolution looked round upon the republics of the world, tested them by
the principles of human nature, found them republican in nothing but the
name, and produced something, more democratic than any of them; but not
democratic enough for the circumstances which were in the course of
arising. They saw that in Holland the people had nothing to do with the
erection of the supreme power; that in Poland (which was called a
republic in their day) the people were oppressed by an incubus of
monarchy and aristocracy, at once, in their most aggravated forms; and
that in Venice a small body of hereditary nobles exercised a stern sway.
They planned something far transcending in democracy any republic yet
heard of; and they are not to be wondered at, or blamed, if, when their
work was done, they feared they had gone too far. They had done much in
preparing the way for the second birth of their republic in 1789, and
for a third in 1801, when the republicans came into power; and from
which date, free government in the United States may be said to have
started on its course.

A remarkable sign of those times remains on record, which shows how
different the state of feeling and opinion was then from any that could
now prevail among a large and honourable body in the republic. The
society of the Cincinnati, an association of officers of the
revolutionary army, and other honourable persons, ordered their
proceedings in a manner totally inconsistent with the first principles
of republicanism; having secret correspondences, decking themselves with
an order, which was to be hereditary, drawing a line of distinction
between military and other citizens, and uniting in a secret bond the
chiefs of the first families of the respective States. Such an
association, formed on the model of some which might be more or less
necessary or convenient in the monarchies of the old world, could not be
allowed to exist in its feudal form in the young republic; and,
accordingly, the hereditary principle, and the power of adopting
honorary members, were relinquished; and the society is heard of no
more. It has had its use in showing how the minds of the earlier
republicans were imbued with monarchical prepossessions, and how large
is the reasonable allowance which must be made for the apprehensions of
men, who, having gone further in democracy than any who had preceded
them, were destined to see others outstrip themselves. Adams, Hamilton,
Washington! what names are these! Yet Adams in those days believed the
English constitution would be perfect, if some defects and abuses were
remedied. Hamilton believed it would be impracticable, if such
alterations were made; and that, in its then existing state, it was the
very best government that had ever been devised. Washington was
absolutely republican in his principles, but did not enjoy the strong
faith, the entire trust in the people, which is the attendant privilege
of those principles. Such men, pressed out from among the multitude by
the strong force of emergency, proved themselves worthy of their mission
of national redemption; but, though we may now be unable to single out
any who, in these comparatively quiet times, can be measured against
them, we are not thence to conclude that society, as a whole, has not
advanced; and that a policy which would have appeared dangerous to them,
may not be, at present, safe and reasonable.

Advantageous, therefore, as it may be, that the present federal party
should be perpetually on the watch against the encroachments of the
state governments,--useful as their incessant recurrence to the first
practices, as well as principles, of the constitution may be,--it would
be for their comfort to remember, that the elasticity of their
institutions is a perpetual safeguard; and, also, that the silent
influence of the federal head of their republics has a sedative effect
which its framers themselves did not anticipate. If they compare the
fickleness and turbulence of very small republics,--Rhode Island, for
instance,--with the tranquillity of the largest, or of the confederated
number, it is obvious that the existence of a federal head keeps down
more quarrels than ever appear.

When the views of the present apprehensive federal party are closely
looked into, they appear to be inconsistent with one or more of the
primary principles of the constitution which we have stated. "The
majority are right." Any fears of the majority are inconsistent with
this maxim, and were always felt by me to be so, from the time I entered
the country till I left it.

One sunny October morning I was taking a drive, with my party, along the
shores of the pretty Owasco Lake, in New York state, and conversing on
the condition of the country with a gentleman who thought the political
prospect less bright than the landscape. I had been less than three
weeks in the country, and was in a state of something like awe at the
prevalence of, not only external competence, but intellectual ability.
The striking effect upon a stranger of witnessing, for the first time,
the absence of poverty, of gross ignorance, of all servility, of all
insolence of manner, cannot be exaggerated in description. I had seen
every man in the towns an independent citizen; every man in the country
a land-owner. I had seen that the villages had their newspapers, the
factory girls their libraries. I had witnessed the controversies between
candidates for office on some difficult subjects, of which the people
were to be the judges. With all these things in my mind, and with every
evidence of prosperity about me in the comfortable homesteads which
every turn in the road, and every reach of the lake, brought into view,
I was thrown into a painful amazement by being told that the grand
question of the time was "whether the people should be encouraged to
govern themselves, or whether the wise should save them from
themselves." The confusion of inconsistencies was here so great as to
defy argument: the patronage among equals that was implied; the
assumption as to who were the wise; and the conclusion that all the rest
must be foolish. This one sentence seemed to be the most extraordinary
combination that could proceed from the lips of a republican.

The expressions of fear vary according to the pursuits, or habits of
mind of those who entertain them: but all are inconsistent with the
theory that the majority are right. One fears the influence in the
national councils of the "Tartar population" of the west, observing that
men retrograde in civilisation when thinly settled in a fruitful
country. But the representatives from these regions will be few while
they are thinly settled, and will be in the minority when in the wrong.
When these representatives become numerous, from the thick settlement of
those regions, their character will have ceased to become Tartar-like
and formidable: even supposing that a Tartar-like character could
co-exist with the commerce of the Mississippi. Another tells me that the
State has been, again and again, "on a lee shore, and a flaw has blown
it off, and postponed the danger; but this cannot go on for ever." The
fact here is true; and it would seem to lead to a directly contrary
inference. "The flaw" is the will of the majority, which might be better
indicated by a figure of something more stable. "The majority is
right." It has thus far preserved the safety of the state; and this is
the best ground for supposing that it will continue to be a safeguard.

One of the most painful apprehensions seems to be that the poorer will
heavily tax the richer members of society; the rich being always a small
class. If it be true, as all parties appear to suppose, that rulers in
general are prone to use their power for selfish purposes, there remains
the alternative, whether the poor shall over-tax the rich, or whether
the rich shall over-tax the poor: and, if one of these evils were
necessary, few would doubt which would be the least. But the danger
appears much diminished on the consideration that, in the country under
our notice, there are not, nor are likely to be, the wide differences in
property which exist in old countries. There is no class of hereditary
rich or poor. Few are very wealthy; few are poor; and every man has a
fair chance of being rich. No such unequal taxation has yet been
ordained by the sovereign people; nor does there appear to be any danger
of it, while the total amount of taxation is so very small as in the
United States, and the interest that every one has in the protection of
property is so great. A friend in the South, while eulogizing to me the
state of society there, spoke with compassion of his northern fellow
citizens, who were exposed to the risks of "a perpetual struggle between
pauperism and property." To which a northern friend replied, that it is
true that there is a perpetual struggle everywhere between pauperism and
property. The question is, which succeeds. In the United States, the
prospect is that each will succeed. Paupers may obtain what they want,
and proprietors will keep that which they have. As a mere matter of
convenience, it is shorter and easier to obtain property by enterprise
and labour in the United States, than by pulling down the wealthy. Even
the most desponding do not consider the case as very urgent, at present.
I asked one of my wealthy friends, who was predicting that in thirty
years his children would be living under a despotism, why he did not
remove. "Where," said he, with a countenance of perplexity, "could I be
better off?"--which appeared to me a truly reasonable question.

In a country, the fundamental principle of whose politics is, that its
"rulers derive their just powers from the consent of the governed," it
is clear that there can be no narrowing of the suffrage. However
earnestly some may desire this, no one hopes it. But it does not follow
that the apprehensive minority has nothing left but discontent. The
enlightenment of society remains not only matter for hope, but for
achievement. The prudent speak of the benefits of education as a matter
of policy, while the philanthropic promote it as a matter of justice.
Security of person and property follows naturally upon a knowledge of
rights. However the aristocracy of wealth, learning, and talent may
differ among themselves, as to what is the most valuable kind of
knowledge, all will agree that every kind will strengthen the bonds of
society. In this direction must the aristocracy work for their own
security. If they sufficiently provide the means of knowledge to the
community, they may dismiss their fears, and rest assured that the great
theory of their government will bear any test; and that "the majority
will be in the right."

If the fears of the aristocracy are inconsistent with the theory of the
government under which they live, so is much of the practice of the
democracy. Their hopefulness is reasonable; their reliance on the
majority is reasonable. But there are evils attendant on their practice
of their true theories which may account for the propounding of worse
theories by their opponents.

Learning by experience is slow work. However sure it may be, it is slow;
and great is the faith and patience required by men who are in advance
of a nation on a point which they feel that they could carry, if they
had not to wait the pleasure of the majority. Though the majority be
right in respect of the whole of politics, there is scarcely a sensible
man who may not be more in the right than the majority with regard to
some one point; and no allowance can be too great for the perpetual
discouragement hence arising. The majority eventually wills the best;
but, in the present imperfection of knowledge, the will is long in
exhibiting itself; and the ultimate demonstration often crowns a series
of mistakes and failures. From this fact arises the complaint of many
federalists that the democratic party is apt to adopt their measures,
after railing both at those measures, and at the men who framed them.
This is often true: and it is true that, if the people had only had the
requisite knowledge, they would have done wisely to have accepted good
measures from the beginning, without any railing at all. But the
knowledge was wanting. The next best thing that can happen is, that
which does happen: that the people learn, and act upon their learning.
If they are not wise enough to adopt a good measure at first, it would
be no improvement of the case that they should be too obstinate to
accept it at last. The case proves only that out of ignorance come
knowledge, conviction, and action; and the majority is ultimately in the
right. Whenever there is less of ignorance to begin with, there will be
less of the railing, which is childish enough, whether as a mere
imputation, or as a reality.

The great theory presumes that the majority not only will the best
measures, but choose the best men. This is far from being true in
practice. In no respect, perhaps, are the people more behind their
theory than in this. The noble set of public servants with which the
people were blessed in their revolutionary period seems to have inspired
them at first with a somewhat romantic faith in men who profess strong
attachment to whatever has been erected into a glory of the nation; and,
from that time to this, the federal party has, from causes which will be
hereafter explained, furnished a far superior set of men to the public
service than the democratic party. I found this fact almost universally
admitted by the wisest adherents of democracy; and out of it has arisen
the mournful question, whether an honest man with false political
principles be not more dangerous as a ruler than an unscrupulous man
with true political principles. I have heard the case put thus: "There
is not yet a sufficiency of real friends of the people willing to be
their servants. They must take either a somewhat better set of men whose
politics they disapprove, or a somewhat worse set of men to make tools
of. They take the tools, use them, and throw them away."

This is true; and a melancholy truth it is; since it is certain that
whenever the people shall pertinaciously require honest servants, and
take due pains to ascertain their honesty, true men will be forthcoming.
Under God's providence, the work never waits for the workman.

This fact, however, has one side as bright as the other is dark. It is
certain that many corrupt public servants are supported under the belief
that they are good and great men. No one can have attended assiduously
on the course of public affairs at Washington, and afterwards listened
to conversation in the stages, without being convinced of this. As soon
as the mistake is discovered, it is rectified. Retribution often comes
sooner than it could have been looked for. Though it be long delayed,
the remedy is ultimately secure. Every corrupt faction breaks up, sooner
or later, and character is revealed: the people let down their
favourite, to hide his head, or continue to show his face, as may best
suit his convenience; and forthwith choose a better man; or one believed
to be better. In such cases, the evil lies in ignorance--a temporary
evil; while the principle of rectification may work, for aught we can
see, eternally.

Two considerations,--one of fact, another of inference,--may reassure
those who are discouraged by these discrepancies between the theories of
the United States' government, and the practice of the democratic party,
with regard to both measures and men. The Americans are practically
acquainted with the old proverb, "What is every body's business is
nobody's business." No man stirs first against an abuse which is no more
his than other people's. The abuse goes on till it begins to overbear
law and liberty. Then the multitude arises, in the strength of the law,
and crushes the abuse. Sufficient confirmation of this will occur to any
one who has known the State histories of the Union for the last twenty
years, and will not be wholly contradicted by the condition of certain
affairs there which now present a bad aspect. Past experience sanctions
the hope that when these bad affairs have grown a little worse, they
will be suddenly and completely redressed. Illustrations in abundance
are at hand.

Lotteries were formerly a great inducement to gaming in Massachusetts.
Prudent fathers warned their sons against lotteries; employers warned
their servants; clergymen warned their flocks. Tracts, denouncing
lotteries, were circulated; much eloquence was expended,--not in vain,
though all sober people were already convinced, and weak people were
still unable to resist the seduction. At length, a young man drowned
himself. A disappointment in a lottery was found to be the cause. A
thrill of horror ran through the community. Every man helped to carry
his horror of lotteries into the legislature; and their abolition
followed in a trice.

Freemasonry was once popular in the United States; and no one seemed to
think any harm of it, though, when examined, it clearly appears an
institution incompatible with true republicanism. The account given of
it by some friends of mine, formerly masons, is, that it is utterly
puerile in itself; that it may be dignified, under a despotism, by an
application to foreign objects, but that it is purely mischievous in a
republic. Its object, of course, is power. It can have no other; and
ought not to have this, where the making of the laws is the office of
the people. Its interior obligations are also violations of the
democratic principle. All this was as true of masonry twelve years ago
as it is now; but masonry was allowed to spread far and wide. One
Morgan, a freemason, living in the western part of the state of New
York, did a remarkable deed, for which various motives are assigned. He
wrote a book in exposure of masonry, its facts and tendencies. When the
first part was printed and secured, some masons broke into the
printing-office where it was deposited, and destroyed as much of the
work as they could lay hold of. Being partly foiled, they bethought
themselves of stopping the work by carrying off the author. He was
arrested for a trifling debt, (probably fictitious,) conveyed hastily to
a magistrate, some miles off, who committed him for want of bail. The
ostensible creditor arrived at the jail, in the middle of the night,
and let him out; four or five men put him into a carriage, which made
for the Canada frontier. On landing him on British ground, the masons
there refused to have any concern in a matter which had gone so far, and
Morgan was shut up in the fort at Niagara village, where the Niagara
river flows into Lake Ontario. There he was fed and guarded for two
days. Thus far, the testimony is express; and concerning the succeeding
circumstances there is no reasonable doubt. He was put into a boat,
carried out into the middle of the river, and thrown in, with a stone
tied to his neck. For four years, there were attempts to bring the
conspirators to justice; but little was done. The lodges subscribed
funds to carry the actual murderers out of the country. Sheriffs,
jurymen, constables, all omitted their duty with regard to the rest. The
people were roused to action by finding the law thus overawed.
Anti-masonic societies were formed. Massachusetts and other States
passed laws against extra-judicial oaths. In such States, the lodges can
make no new members, and are becoming deserted by the old. The
anti-masonic party flourishes, having a great principle as its basis. It
has the control in a few States, and powerful influence in others.
Morgan's disclosures have been carried on by other hands. A bad
institution is overthrown. The people have learned an important lesson;
and they have gone through an honourable piece of discipline in making a
stand for the law, which is the life of their body politic.

Thus end, and thus, we may trust, will end the mistakes of the people,
whose professed interest is in a wise self-government. Some worse
institutions even than masonry remain to be cast out. The law has been
again overawed; not once, but many times; and the eyes of the world are
on the people of the United States, to see what they will do. The world
is watching to discover whether they are still sensible of the sacred
value of unviolated law; whether they are examining who it is that
threatens and overbears the law, and why; and whether they are
proceeding towards the re-establishment of the peace and security of
their whole community, by resolutely rooting out from among their
institutions every one which will not bear the test of the first
principles of the whole.

The other ground of hope of which I spoke as being inferential, arises
out of the imaginative political character of the Americans. They have
not yet grown old in the ways of the world. Their immediate fathers have
done such a deed as the world never saw; and the children have not yet
passed out the intoxication of success. With far less of vanity and
presumption than might have been looked for from their youth among the
nations, with an extraordinary amount of shrewdness and practical talent
shared among individuals, the American people are as imaginative as any
nation I happen to have heard or read of. They reminded me every day of
the Irish. The frank, confiding character of their private intercourses,
the generous nature of their mutual services, the quickness and
dexterity of their doings, their fertility of resource, their proneness
to be run away with by a notion, into any extreme of absurdity--in all
this, and in everything but their deficiency of moral independence, (for
which a difference of circumstances will fully account,) they resemble
the Irish. I regard the American people as a great embryo poet: now
moody, now wild, but bringing out results of absolute good sense:
restless and wayward in action, but with deep peace at his heart:
exulting that he has caught the true aspect of things past, and at the
depth of futurity which lies before him, wherein to create something so
magnificent as the world has scarcely begun to dream of. There is the
strongest hope of a nation that is capable of being possessed with an
idea; and this kind of possession has been the peculiarity of the
Americans from their first day of national existence till now. Their
first idea was loftier than some which have succeeded; but they have
never lost sight of the first. It remains to be, at intervals,
apprehended anew; and whenever the time shall arrive, which cannot but
arrive, when the nation shall be so fully possessed of the complete idea
as by a moral necessity to act it out, they will be as far superior to
nations which act upon the experience and expediency of their time as
the great poet is superior to common men.

This time is yet very far distant; and the American people have not only
much to learn, and a painful discipline to endure, but some disgraceful
faults to repent of and amend. They must give a perpetual and earnest
heed to one point; to cherish their high democratic hope, their faith in
man. The older they grow, the more must they "reverence the dreams of
their youth." They must eschew the folly and profaneness so prevalent in
the old world, of exalting man, abstractedly and individually, as a
piece of God's creation, and despising men in the mass. The statesman in
a London theatre feels his heart in a tumult, while a deep amen echoes
through its chambers at Hamlet's adoration of humanity; but not the
less, when he goes home, does he speak slightingly, compassionately, or
protectingly of the masses, the population, the canaille. He is
awestruck with the grandeur of an individual spirit; but feels nothing
of the grandeur of a congregated million of like spirits, because they
happen to be far off. This proves nothing but the short-sightedness of
such a man. Such shortness of sight afflicts some of the wisest and best
men in the new world. I know of one who regards with a humble and
religious reverence the three or four spirits which have their
habitation under his roof, and close at hand; who begins to doubt and
question, in the face of far stronger outward evidence of good, persons
who are a hundred miles off; and has scarcely any faith left for those
who happen to be over the sea. The true democratic hope cannot coexist
with such distrust. Its basis is the unmeasured scope of humanity; and
its _rationale_ the truth, applicable alike to individuals and nations,
that men are what they are taken for granted to be. "Countrymen," cries
Brutus, dying,


     "My heart doth joy that yet in all my life,
     I found no man but he was true to me."


The philosophy of this fact is clear; it followed of course from Brutus
always supposing that men were true. Whenever the Americans, or any
other people, shall make integrity their rule, their criterion, their
invariable supposition, the first principles of political philosophy
will be fairly acted out, and the high democratic hope will be its own
justification.

FOOTNOTE:

[2] Jefferson writes, September, 1798, "The most long-sighted politician
could not, seven years ago, have imagined that the people of this wide
extended country could have been enveloped in such delusion, and made so
much afraid of themselves and their own power, as to surrender it
spontaneously to those who are manoeuvring them into a form of
government, the principal branches of which may be beyond their
control."

Again, March, 1801:--"You have understood that the revolutionary
movements in Europe had, by industry and artifice, been wrought into
objects of terror in this country, and had really involved a great
portion of our well-meaning citizens in a panic which was perfectly
unaccountable, and during the prevalence of which they were led to
support measures the most insane. They are now pretty thoroughly
recovered from it, and sensible of the mischief which was done, and
preparing to be done, had their minds continued a little longer under
that derangement. The recovery bids fair to be complete, and to
obliterate entirely the line of party division, which had been so
strongly drawn."--_Jefferson's Correspondence_, vol. iii. pp. 401, 457.




CHAPTER II.

APPARATUS OF GOVERNMENT.

     "The true foundation of republican government is the equal right of
     every citizen, in his person and property, and in their management.
     Try by this, as a tally, every provision of our constitution, and
     see if it hangs directly on the will of the people."

     _Jefferson._


Though it be true that the principles of government are to be deduced
more from experience of human nature than experience of human
governments, the institutions in which those principles are to be
embodied must be infinitely modified by preceding circumstances. Bentham
must have forgotten this when he offered, at sixty-four, to codify for
several of the United States, and also for Russia. He proposed to
introduce a new set of terms. These could not, from his want of local
knowledge, have been very specific; and if general, what was society to
do till the lawyers had done arguing? How could even a Solomon
legislate, three thousand miles off, for a republic like that of
Connecticut, which set out with taking its morals and politics by
handfuls, out of Numbers and Deuteronomy? or for Virginia, rank with
feudal prejudices and methods? or for Delaware, with its monarchical
martyr spirit? or for Louisiana, compounded of Spain, France, and
America? Though at the time of the framing of the constitution, the
States bore a strong general resemblance in their forms of government,
endless minor differences existed, mainly arising from the different
tenure on which they had been held under the English crown. Some had
been provinces, governed by royal commissions, according to royal
convenience. These were New Hampshire, New York, Virginia, the
Carolinas, and Georgia. Others had been under proprietary government; as
Maryland, held under patent, by Lord Baltimore; and Pennsylvania and
Delaware, held by William Penn. Others, again, were under charter
governments; ruled and altogether disposed of by political corporations.
Such were Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. Within the
memory of middle-aged men, the governor of New Hampshire used to travel
in a coach and six, while the governor of the much more important
Massachusetts went on a horse, with his wife on a pillion. It is within
the memory of living men how Massachusetts rose up in rejection of the
imposition of a clergy by England; while the colonial law of Virginia
ordained parsons to be paid yearly six thousand weight of prime tobacco,
in addition to marriage, burial, and birth-fees; in which days, an
unholy pastor, appointed by Lord Baltimore, was seen to ride about with
the church key in one hand, and a pistol in the other. It is absurd to
suppose that communities, where wide differences of customs, prejudices,
and manners still exist, can be, or ought to be, brought into a state of
exact conformity of institutions. Diversities, not only of old custom,
but of climate, productions and genealogy, forbid it; and reason does
not require it. That institutions should harmonise with the same first
principles, is all that is requisite. Some, who would not go so far as
to offer to codify for countries where they have not get their foot,
are yet apt to ask the use of one or another institution, to which the
Americans seem to be unreasonably attached. It is a sufficient general
answer that institutions are rarely sudden and complete inventions. They
have usually an historical origin, even when renovated by revolution.
Their protracted existence, and the attachment of the people to them are
strong presumptions of their having some use. If their purposes can be
better attained in another way, they will surely be modified. If they
are the result of compromise, they will be abolished, according to the
invariable law by which expediency finally succumbs to principle. That
this will be the fate of certain of the United States' institutions
which no one yet dreams of touching, and few dare to analyze, has been
clearly foreseen, for forty years past, by many of the most upright and
able men in the country. Some of them entertain an agonizing alarm at
the prospect of change. Others, more reasonably, trust that, where no
large pecuniary interests are at stake, the work of rectifying may very
quietly and safely succeed that of reconciling: and the majority have no
idea of the changes which their own hands, or their children's, will
have to effect. The gradual ripening for change may be an advantage in
more respects than one. Political changes which are the result of full
conviction in a free people, are pretty sure to be safe. Time is also
allowed, meanwhile, for men to practice their new lesson of separating
the idea of revolution from the horrors which have no more natural
connexion with it than burning at the stake has with the firm grasp of
speculative truth.


SECTION I.

THE GENERAL GOVERNMENT.

"We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect
union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquillity, provide for the
common defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of
liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this
Constitution for the United States of America."

So much for the authority, and the objects of this celebrated
constitution, as set forth in its preamble.

Its provisions are so well known that it is needful only to indicate
them. In Europe, the difficulty is to avoid supposing the state
governments to be subordinate to the general. "They are coordinate
departments of one simple and integral whole." State government
legislates and administers in all affairs which concern its own
citizens. To the federal government are consigned all affairs which
concern citizens, as foreigners from other states, or as fellow-citizens
with all in certain specified relations.

The general objects of the instrument are easily stated; and an
apparently clear case of separation between the general and state
governments drawn out upon paper. But the application of the instrument
to practice is the difficulty.

In this, there are two grand difficulties, among many of inferior
importance. The one is, to construe the instrument; the other is, to
bridge over its awful chasms of compromise.

There has never been a solemn instrument drawn up yet without leaving
room for varieties of construction. There never can be, under our
present use of abstract terms; no two men's abstractions being alike, or
discoverably so. Of course, the profession in this case is, that words
are to be taken according to their just and natural import; that there
is to be no straining; that they are to be judged of according to common
sense; and so on. The old jests against etymologists are enough to prove
how far men are from agreeing what straining is. As to common sense, men
respond in unison to a revelation of it; but they rarely agree, _à
priori_, as to what it is. This difficulty is a wholly unavoidable one.
The refuge under it is in the maxim "the majority are right." If the
case in dispute be one of judicial import, the citizen may appeal to the
Supreme Court. If it be of a different nature, it must be left to that
other kind of supreme court,--the majority,--and the verdict will be
given through the ballot-boxes.

The other difficulty, that of compromise, is declared to have been
equally unavoidable. Concession, large mutual concession, was clearly
necessary. To what extent, may be faintly conceived from the following
extract from the Federalist. To some readers, who are more interested in
the present workings of the government, than in the embarrassments of
its inventors, this extract may appear dull. But it is useful to be
presented with an outline of the difficulties incurred in legislating
for a federal republic, both as a fact in political science; as a means
of forming something like a just judgment of the framers of the
constitution; and as a ground of hope that, so much danger having been
surmounted, that which remains may be also overcome.

"This one tells us, that the proposed constitution ought to be
rejected, because it is not a confederation of the States, but a
government over individuals. Another admits, that it ought to be a
government over individuals, to a certain extent, but by no means to the
extent proposed. A third does not object to the government over
individuals, or to the extent proposed; but to the want of a Bill of
Rights. A fourth concurs in the absolute necessity of a Bill of Rights,
but contends that it ought to be declaratory, not of the personal rights
of individuals, but of the rights reserved to the States in their
political capacity. A fifth is of opinion that a Bill of Rights of any
sort would be superfluous and misplaced; and that the plan would be
unexceptionable, but for the fatal power of regulating the times and
places of election. An objector in a large State exclaims loudly against
the unreasonable equality of representation in the senate. An objector
in a small State is equally loud against the dangerous inequality in the
House of Representatives. From one quarter, we are alarmed with the
amazing expense, from the number of persons who are to administer the
new government. From another quarter, and sometimes from the same
quarter on another occasion, the cry is that the Congress will be but
the shadow of a representation; and that the government would be far
less objectionable, if the number of the expenses were doubled. A
patriot in a State that does not import or export, discerns insuperable
objections against the power of direct taxation. The patriotic
adversary, in a State of great exports and imports, is not less
dissatisfied that the whole burthen of taxes may be thrown on
consumption. This politician discovers in the constitution a direct and
irresistible tendency to monarchy. That, is equally sure that it will
end in aristocracy. Another is puzzled to say which of these shapes it
will ultimately assume, but sees clearly it must be one or other of
them. While a fourth is not wanting, who, with no less confidence,
affirms, that the constitution is so far from having a bias towards
either of these dangers, that the weight on that side will not be
sufficient to keep it upright and firm against its opposite
propensities. With another class of adversaries to the constitution, the
language is, that the legislative, executive, and judiciary departments
are intermixed in such a manner as to contradict all the ideas of
regular government, and all the requisite precautions in favour of
liberty. Whilst this objection circulates in vague and general
expressions, there are not a few who lend their sanction to it. Let each
one come forward with his particular explanation, and scarcely any two
are exactly agreed on the subject. In the eyes of one, the junction of
the senate with the president, in the responsible function of appointing
to offices, instead of vesting this power in the executive alone, is the
vicious part of the organisation. To another, the exclusion of the House
of Representatives, whose numbers alone could be a due security against
corruption and partiality in the exercise of such a power, is equally
obnoxious. With a third, the admission of the president into any share
of a power, which must ever be a dangerous engine in the hands of the
executive magistrate, is an unpardonable violation of the maxims of
republican jealousy. No part of the arrangement, according to some, is
more inadmissible than the trial of impeachments by the Senate, which is
alternately a member both of the legislative and executive departments,
when this power so evidently belonged to the judiciary department. We
concur fully, reply others, in the objection to this part of the plan;
but we can never agree that a reference of impeachments to the judiciary
authority would be an amendment of the error: our principal dislike to
the organisation arises from the extensive powers already lodged in that
department. Even among the zealous patrons of a council of state, the
most irreconcilable variance is discovered, concerning the mode in which
it ought to be constituted. The demand of one gentleman is, that the
council should consist of a small number, to be appointed by the most
numerous branch of the legislature. Another would prefer a larger
number, and considers it a fundamental condition, that the appointment
should be made by the president himself."[3]

It must have cost Mr. Madison some trouble to vary the mode of
expression in putting this host of objections. We cannot but admire the
ingenuity with which he has brought them into view. But what should we
say to the management which should reconcile the differences themselves?
Concessions, various and large, were obviously necessary. I am not about
to give a catalogue of what these actually were. They may be learned
from any history of the period. Suffice it that the general and state
governments not only urged and established claims, but admitted a set of
prohibitions on themselves.

In all this there appears no fatal compromise. But there were some which
made the wisest men of the time tremble for the stability of their noble
work. There seems peril enough in the liability to the occurrence of new
questions, which could not be foreseen, and for which an opening might,
or might not, happen to be left. When, in addition to such, there were
some questions left to be settled by a future government, from the
inability of the statesmen of 1787 to agree upon them, these statesmen
might well be uneasy about the stability of their work. Of the first
order of questions is that which is now debated with great
animosity,--whether Congress has power to abolish slavery in the
District of Columbia: a disputed point of construction, on which it
seems to me that no plain person can be blamed for not anticipating any
difference of opinion. Of the second class is that great question, or
nest of questions, respecting Reserved Rights. It was agreed that all
unforeseen questions which might arise with regard to the respective
powers of the general and state governments, should be settled by the
state governments; but then, there was an indefinite limitation
introduced in the clause, that the general government should have all
powers necessary for the prosecution of such and such purposes. This
vague clause has been the occasion of the Union being shaken to its
centre; and it may be thus shaken again, before the questions arising
out of it are all settled.

Even these, being open questions, are less formidable than the
compromise of the true republican principle which is apparent in some
provisions of the constitution, and in some of the most important
institutions of the country. The northern States, which had abolished,
on principle, a far milder slavery than that of the cotton and
sugar-growing south, agreed to admit slavery in the south as a basis for
direct taxation, and for representation. They did worse. They agreed to
act in behalf of their southern fellow-citizens in the capture and
restitution of runaway slaves, and in the defence of masters against
rebellious slaves. What bitter sorrows of conscience and of feeling this
compromise has cost their children, it is impossible fully to describe.
Of course, the law, being against conscience, _i. e._ the law of man
coming into collision with the law of God, is constantly broken; and
causes of dissension hence arise. I know that slavery is only recognised
by the constitution as a matter of fact; and that it is only twice
mentioned; in connexion with representation, and with the restitution to
their masters of "persons held to labour escaping into another State:"
but the fact remains that a man who abhors slavery is compellable by the
law which his fathers made, to deliver up to the owner a slave whose act
of absconding he approves. It is impossible to estimate the evils which
have proceeded from, and which will yet arise out of this guilty but
"necessary" compromise.

There was difficulty in bringing the greater and smaller States into
union. The smaller States could not agree to such an unequal
representation as should render them liable to be swallowed up by the
larger; while the larger could not consent to be reduced to an equality
with the smaller. The Senate was established to afford an equal state
representation; while the House of Representatives affords a fair
representation of the nation in the aggregate, according to numbers. But
the principle of the general government is, that it governs the entire
people as one nation, and not as a league of States. There ought, in
consistency with this, to be no state representation at all; and the
Senate is an anomaly. An anomalous institution cannot be very
long-lived. A second chamber, on a more consistent principle, will
probably be established in its place, to fulfil its functions as a Court
of Review, and as a check upon the precipitation of the other house,
and, if need be, upon the encroachments of the executive. There is yet
more of compromise involved in this institution of the Senate; as might
be expected, since there is no end of compromise when principle is once
departed from; yet there are statesmen who defend it on other grounds
than that its establishment was necessary to the foundation of any
federal government at all. One observed to me, "Some things look well in
theory, and fail in practice. This may not be justifiable in theory; but
it works well." If this last sentence be true, the well-working of the
Senate is only a temporary affair; an accident. Its radical change
becomes a question of time merely; and the recent agitation of the
question of Instructions seems to indicate that the time is not very far
distant.

The appointment of the judges for life is another departure from the
absolute republican principle. There is no actual control over them.
Theirs is a virtually irresponsible office. Much can be and is said in
defence of this arrangement; and whatever is said, is most powerfully
enforced by the weight of character possessed by the judiciary, up to
this day. But all this does not alter the fact that irresponsible
offices are an inconsistency in a republic. With regard to all this
compromise, no plea of expediency can alter the fact that, while the
House of Representatives is mainly republican, the Senate is only
partially so, being anomalous in its character, and its members not
being elected immediately by the people; and that the judiciary is not
republican at all, since the judges are independent of the nation, from
the time of their appointment.

I was told, on high authority, that the assent of the first nine States
to the constitution, in 1788, was obtained by means not absolutely fair.
What devices were used to procure an apparent majority, I was not
informed; but it is generally supposed that if there had been no
legislatures active on the occasion, if it had been put to the vote
throughout the nation, the ratification would not have taken place when
it did. Chief Justice Marshall gives testimony to this effect in his
Life of Washington. "So small, in many instances, was the majority in
favour of the constitution, as to afford strong ground for the opinion
that, had the influence of character been removed, the intrinsic merits
of the instrument would not have secured its adoption. Indeed, it is
scarcely to be doubted that, in some of the adopting States, a majority
of the people were in opposition."

That a constitution, so framed, and so carried, should have worked as
well as it has done, seems to point out two very encouraging things;
that we may, without rashness, speak of it as Washington did, when he
said, "I was convinced it approached nearer to perfection than any
government hitherto instituted among men;" and that the world may
quietly and hopefully await the further proceedings of the American
people, in their advances towards an uncompromising democracy. There
will be changes, but not therefore convulsion. There will be the change
which Jefferson foresaw, and provided for without dread. "Still," says
he, so lately as June, 1824, "we consider our constitutions not
otherwise changeable than by the authority of the people, on a special
election of representatives for that very purpose: they are, until then,
the _lex legum_. But can they be made unchangeable? Can one generation
bind another, and all others, in succession for ever? I think not. The
Creator has made the earth for the living, not the dead."--"A generation
may bind itself as long as its majority continues in life; when that has
disappeared, another majority is in place, holds all the rights and
powers their predecessors once held, and may change their laws and
institutions to suit themselves. Nothing then is unchangeable but the
inherent and inalienable rights of man."[4]

Nothing can be more striking to a stranger than the experience gained,
after some residence in the United States, of the ultimate ascendency of
the will of the majority--_i. e._ of the right--in defiance of all
appearances to the contrary. The review of what I witnessed of this
kind, in the course of two years, with regard to the conduct of Congress
alone, surprises and cheers me. It is true that I see several wrongs
unredressed; several wounds inflicted on the people's liberties yet
unhealed; but these are cases in which the people do not yet understand
what has been done; or have not yet roused themselves to show that they
do.

In the Senate, the people's right of petition is invaded. Last session,
it was ordained that all petitions and memorials relating to a
particular subject--slavery in the District of Columbia--should be laid
on the table unread, and never recurred to. Of course, the people will
not long submit to this. What has been already achieved in Congress on
this topic is a security that the rest will follow. When I entered the
United States, there was an absolute and most ominous silence in
Congress about slavery. Almost every leading man there told me in
conversation that it was the grand question of all; that every member's
mind was full of it; that nearly all other questions were much affected,
or wholly determined by it; yet no one even alluded to it in public.
Before I left, it had found its way into both houses. The houses had, in
some sort, come to a vote upon it, which showed the absolute abolition
strength in the House of Representatives to be forty-seven. The entering
wedge having been thus far driven, it is inconceivable that the nation
will allow it to be withdrawn by surrendering their right of petition.
When I left, however, the people had virtually no right of petition with
regard to the District over which they--_i. e._ their Congress--have an
exclusive jurisdiction.

Again. There were loud and extensive complaints, last session, of the
despotism of the chair in the House of Representatives, chiefly in
connexion with the subject of slavery. No members, it was said, were
allowed a fair hearing but those who sat in a particular part of the
house. If this complaint arises out of the peevishness of political
disappointment, it will soon be contradicted by facts. If it is true, it
is a grave injury. In either case, the chair will not long possess this
power of despotism. If the favoured are few, as the complaint states,
the injured many will demand and obtain the power to make themselves
heard in turn; and no spirit of party can long stand in the way of a
claim so just.

Again. After the gentlemen of Charleston had disgraced their city and
country, by breaking into the post-office, and burning the contents of
the mail-bags, in their dread of abolition papers, a post-master wrote
to a member of the cabinet, desiring his approbation for having examined
and refused to forward certain papers mailed at his office. The member
of the cabinet, Kendall, gave the desired sanction to this audacious
stoppage of the post-office function, declaring that the good of the
community (as judged of by the individual) is a consideration above the
law. The strangers in the land knew not what to make of the
fool-hardiness of hazarding such a declaration, in a man of Kendall's
wit. It was known that he desired the office of post-master-general;
that the president wished him to have it, and that the doubt was whether
the Senate would confirm the appointment. Soon after this apparently
fatal declaration, he was nominated, and the Senate confirmed his
appointment. The declaration, no doubt, seated him in office. The
southern members were won by it. Kendall calculated rightly for his
immediate object. What is to become of him when the people shall at
length recognise the peril and insult to themselves of one of their
favoured servants declaring the will of an individual to be occasionally
subversive of the law--_i. e._ of the will of the majority--remains to
be seen. Meantime, the continuance in office of the person whose
declaration to the above effect remains unretracted, may be regarded as
one of the deepest wounds which has been inflicted on the liberties of
the nation.

Another attempt, brought on, no doubt, by Kendall's success, to derange
or stop the functions of the post-office, has failed. Mr. Calhoun's
Bill, commonly called the Gag Bill, prohibiting postmasters from
receiving and forwarding any papers whatsoever containing anything
relating to slavery, actually was brought to a third reading by the
casting vote of the president of the Senate. There was fear, at the
time, that this casting vote might ensure the success of the bill, from
the popularity of the vice-president. But the bill was thrown out on the
third reading; and the effect of the casting vote has been, not to aid
the bill, but to injure materially the popularity of the vice-president.
This is so far well. It shows that the people are preparing to grapple
honestly with the great, the hideous question, out of which arise these
minor encroachments upon their liberties.

Out of the slavery question arose the last monstrous usurpation of
Congress, for which the emphatic rebuke of the nation awaits the sinning
members. The story deserves to be told at length, on account both of its
peculiarities, and of its furnishing a fair illustration of certain
relations between the state and general governments.

Great Britain was not very learned in the geography of the new world,
in the early days of her colonies there. She gave Virginia a patent for
lands, including what is now Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan,
Missouri, and on to the Pacific. Other colonies obtained grants of equal
moderation as to size, and wisdom as to disposition. This absurd
partition, it was found, must occasion irreconcilable quarrels among the
members of the confederation; and Washington proposed that all, after
fixing their own boundaries, should throw into the common stock the huge
unoccupied domain. Virginia led the way in making this honourable
sacrifice. She fixed her own boundary; and the articles of compact
between the United States and the people of the territory north-west of
the Ohio river, declared that the territory should be divided into not
more than five, nor less than three States. This was in 1787. The
boundary prescribed for Ohio and Michigan, was found to be "not
convenient." That is, Ohio found it so; and Michigan was not in a
situation, at the time when Ohio was admitted into the Union, to insist
upon the ancient boundary, prescribed at the time of the cession of land
by Virginia. When Ohio was made a State, the boundary she desired was,
among other particulars, ratified by Congress.

In 1816, another portion of land, lying within what Michigan supposed to
be her own territory, was taken from her, and added to Indiana, on the
latter being made a State. An equivalent is offered to Michigan in a
portion of land, to be taken out of Wisconsin, on the western side of
Lake Michigan, which is the natural boundary of the territory. Michigan
alleges that the inconvenience of a part of her territory lying on the
other side of the lake would be so great, that the inhabitants would
prefer belonging to Wisconsin; and the land would be ceded, as soon as
Wisconsin becomes a State. The decision of the right of this case is the
proper business of the Supreme Court, whenever the contesting parties
shall have all come into the Union. Meantime, all parties are interested
in bearing down the claims of Michigan. Ohio and Indiana desire to keep
the lands Congress has authorised them to take. The slave States are
anxious to hinder the increase in number of the free States; and by the
ordinance of 1787, slavery is prohibited for ever, north-west of the
Ohio. The slave States hope, by giving to Michigan a slice of Wisconsin,
to make Wisconsin too small to be hereafter divided into two States. In
this object, the south will be foiled. Even if slavery should exist till
Wisconsin is ready for admission into the Union, there are two ways by
which the desire of the south may and will be foiled. By the re-cession
of the inconvenient portion by Michigan, as mentioned above; and by the
willingness of these northern States to make themselves smaller, and add
one to their number, as, by a _proviso_ in the original compact, they
have power to do, than let themselves be overborne by the south. This
part of the contest, for "a balance of power," arises altogether out of
the slavery question.

Soon after I entered the country, Michigan became qualified to request
admission into the Union. She did so, declaring her discontent with the
boundaries prescribed to her by Congress, and her intention to demand,
in the Supreme Court, on her admission, the re-establishment of the old
ones. I was amused with the different views of the affair presented to
me in different parts of the country. At Cincinnati, in June, 1835, I
was told that the President had just transmitted a threat to Ohio, that
if she did not yield the boundary claimed by Michigan, he would send the
United States troops to fight it out. It was added that the
vice-president had thus far prevailed with the President; it being of
importance to Mr. Van Buren, that Michigan, which he considered in his
interest, should be admitted into the Union in time to vote for him in
the presidential election of 1836. There was much talk at Cincinnati of
the resources of Ohio. The people would turn out, to a man. The
legislature had instantly voted 300,000 dollars to raise troops; and one
hundred and fifty thousand men would immediately be in the field: while
Michigan had neither men nor money;--had absolutely nothing to depend
upon but the six thousand United States' soldiers. This seemed to me to
be too clear a case to be a very true one: and the event belied the
story in almost every particular. Michigan did raise men; (though there
was no war:) she had not the United States' troops: she is not in the
interest of Van Buren; and Ohio could bring no troops into the field.

Michigan proceeded to organise her state government, and sent her
senators to Washington, during the session of 1835 and 1836. They were
allowed to witness the proceedings, but not, of course, to vote. When I
arrived at Detroit, the capital of Michigan, in the middle of June,
1836, the Governor told me that the Michiganians were in the singular
position of having a state government in full operation, while they were
excluded from the Union. The general opinion seemed to be that some
concession must be made about the boundary line; in which case, Michigan
would be admitted, in time to vote at the presidential election. I
pursued my travels through and around the Territory; and when I returned
to Detroit, a month afterwards, I found the place in a state of high
excitement: an excitement fully warranted by the circumstances which had
occurred.

Congress had acknowledged Michigan to be a sovereign State; and had
offered to admit her into the Union, on condition of her surrendering
all claim to the disputed portions of territory.

A grosser usurpation of power can hardly be conceived. Congress here
usurped the function of the Supreme Court in passing sentence against
Michigan: passing sentence, too, without hearing, or having a right to
listen to, evidence on the case. Congress here required of Michigan to
lay down her rights on the threshold of the Union, if she meant to be
admitted. Mr. Adams intrepidly declared in the House of Representatives,
that Michigan had more cause to ply the Nullification doctrine than
South Carolina ever had. A South Carolina nullifier declared in
conversation, that he believed the Michiganians' claims to be just: but
that, sooner than give her the means of summoning another sovereign
State before the Supreme Court, he would vote for her exclusion from the
Union as long as he lives. A strange posture of affairs, where all
justice seemed to be set aside, and the constitution to have become a
dead letter!

The anxiety next was to know what Michigan would do. There seemed too
many symptoms of yielding. It was mournful to those who felt that now
was the time, now the opportunity, so often sighed for in the best
moments of the best men, for making a heroic stand for the right, to
hear the forebodings about the canal shares, the lake trade, the
probable pecuniary loss in various ways, if there should be delay in the
admission of Michigan into the Union. If we spoke of the constitution,
we were answered with the canal. If we spoke of patriotism, we were
answered with the surplus revenue--the share of it that would be lost.
Then, there were fears of war. We were told that the alternative
was--admission, with its advantages, and a surrender of the contested
lands; and exclusion, with war between infant Michigan and Ohio, backed
by the United States. The alternative was rather, admission, with
submission to unconstitutional force; or exclusion, with the lonely
enjoyment of an honest sovereignty. But this was not the only
alternative. Remaining out of the Union did not involve war. Michigan
might remain out of the Union, peaceably, and under protest, till the
people of the United States should become fully possessed of her case,
and aroused to do her justice. It was with heartfelt delight that I
found, at length, that this last honest course is that which Michigan
has determined to pursue. It is so common for communities, as for
individuals, to miss the moment for doing the greatest of their deeds,
to have the bright object of their preceding worship eclipsed at the
critical moment, to pray incessantly that they may be honest, and then
stand aghast, after all, at an honest deed, that the meeting of the
Convention which was to consider of this affair, was watched with deep
anxiety by the friends of Michigan. We, their visitors, gathered hope
from the tone of the Governor, and others with whom we conversed; from
the aspect of the legislators who were assembled to discuss the
Governor's message;--men with earnest and sensible faces, who looked as
if they were aware that their liberties were at stake; and from the
spirited conduct of Michigan from the beginning of the quarrel. Still,
we were doubtful whether the canal, the surplus revenue, and the
probable war, would not be too much for the fortitude of so young a
people. They have shamed our fears, and made a stand for constitutional
liberty, which will secure to them the gratitude of the Union, to the
latest day of its existence. They have refused to enter the Union on the
unconstitutional terms proposed. The people will see that they are
honourably admitted, and that Congress is duly rebuked.


SECTION II.

THE EXECUTIVE.

The principle which is professed in the appointment of a chief
magistrate in the United States is, that his removal is to be as easy as
possible, and effected without disturbing for a moment the proceedings
of government. Under the idea that this last must be impossible, some of
the patriots of 1789 were opposed to the institution of the office of
President altogether; and there are now some who desire that the chief
magistrate should be, as nearly as possible, a cipher; that, for this
purpose, his election should be annual; and that, if this cannot be, the
term should continue to be four years, but without renewal. Such declare
that the office was made for the man, Washington, who was wanted, to
reconcile all parties. They maintain that, though it was, for a
considerable time, well filled, it must become, sooner or later,
dangerous to the public welfare: that it comprehends too much power for
a citizen of a republic to hold, presents too high a stake, occupies too
much thought, and employs too much endeavour, to the exclusion of better
objects.

Some desire that the office should have a duration of six years, without
renewal.

No one dreams of an attempt to hold the office for a third term; and
there is every prospect that, if any President should be ambitious
enough to desire a second re-election, he would fail, and descend from
his high station with a total loss of honour.

Some think so highly of the dignity of the chief magistracy, as to
propose that ex-presidents should be debarred from holding lower
offices. This looks too like an approximation to the monarchical
principle to be, or to become, a popular way of viewing the subject. It
is a proposition of the high federalists. I was far more gratified than
amused at seeing Mr. Adams daily in his seat in the House of
Representatives, while the history of his administration was perpetually
referred to by those who discussed the politics of the country with me.
I am aware that two interpretations may be put upon the fact of an
ex-president desiring a lower office. It may occur from a patriotism
which finds its own dignity in the welfare of its country, or from a
restless ambition to be in the public eye. In either case, it seems to
be no matter for a fixed rule. The republican principle supposes every
man to be at all times ready to serve his country, when called upon. The
rest must be left to the character of the man, and the views of his
constituents.

Others think so much more highly of the dignity of the Senate than of
the executive, as to desire that senators should be ineligible for the
office of President. The object here is two-fold: to exalt the Senate;
and, by making half a hundred offices higher in honour than that of
President, to drain off some of the eager ambition which flows in the
direction of the executive function. But power is more alluring than
honour; and executive offices will always be objects of choice, in
preference to legislative, except with a very small class of men.
Besides, the Senate is already further removed from the control of the
people, than consistency with the true republican principle allows: and
if the people are to be precluded from choosing their chief magistrate
from among the fifty wisest men (as the senators are in theory) that the
States can choose for the guardianship of their interests, the dignity
of both functions would be much lowered. In theory, the people's range
of choice for their chief magistrate is to extend from the
vice-president's chair to the humblest abode which nestles in the rocks
of their eastern coasts, or overlooks the gulf of Mexico. The honour in
which the Senate is held must depend on its preserving the character,
which, on the whole, it has hitherto maintained. A nobler legislative
body, for power and principle, has probably never been known.
Considering the number of individuals of whom it is composed, its
character has, perhaps, been as remarkable as that of the noble array of
Presidents, of which the United States have to boast. If, amidst its
indirect mode of election, and long term of office, it should prove
equally stable in principle, and flexible in its methods of progress, it
may yet enjoy a long term of existence, as honourable as could be
secured by any exclusion of its members from other offices in the
commonwealth.

By far the greatest apprehension connected with the President's office,
relates to the extent of his patronage. It was highly alarming, at
first, to hear all that was said about the country being ridden with
administration-officers, and office-expectants. A little arithmetic,
however, proved very cheering. The most eminent alarmist I happened to
converse with, stated the number of persons directly and indirectly
interested in the bestowment of office by the executive, to be 150,000.
No exact calculation can be made, since no one can do more than
conjecture how many persons at a time are likely to be in expectation
of any one office. But the above may be taken as the widest exaggeration
which an honest alarmist can put forth. This class of interested persons
is, after all, but a small section of the population. There is every
reason to fear that official corruption is abundant under all
governments; and, for some reasons which will be easily apprehended,
remarkably so under the government of the United States; but, when it is
considered how small a proportion of the people is, at any time,
interested in office, and how many persons in office are to be, in
fairness, supposed honest, the evil of executive patronage diminishes to
the imagination so rapidly as to induce a suspicion that many who say
the most about it are throwing a tub to the whale. The watchfulness on
the executive power thus induced is a benefit which will set off against
a great amount of alarm. It will assist the people to find the true mean
between their allowing the President too much power over the servants
who are to transact their business, and their assuming too much control
over the servants who are to transact his.

Difficult as it is to resist impressions on the spot, from all that is
said about the power of the executive, and the character of the
President of the time, the worst alarms are derided by the event. It
does not appear as if the President could work any permanent effect upon
the mind and destiny of the nation. It is of great consequence to the
morals and prosperity of the season, that the chief magistrate should be
a man of principle, rather than expediency; a frank friend of the
people, rather than their cunning flatterer; a man of sense and temper,
rather than an angry bigot; a man of business, rather than a blunderer.
But the term of an unworthy or incapable President is pretty sure to be
the shortest; and, if permitted to serve his eight years, he can do
little unless he acts, on the whole, in accordance with the mind of the
people. If he has any power, it is because the people are with him: in
which case, he cannot be very destructive to their interests. If he does
not proceed in accordance with public sentiment, he has no power. A
brief review of the course of the American Presidents seems to show that
their influence subsides into something very weak and transitory; always
excepting that immeasurable and incalculable influence which is breathed
forth through the remotest generations, by the personal character of
conspicuous individuals.

Washington's influence is a topic which no one is ever hardy enough to
approach, in the way of measurement or specification. Within the compass
of his name lies more than other words can tell of his power over men.
When the British officers were passing up the Potomac, in the last war,
to perpetrate as dastardly a deed of spoliation at the capital as ever
it was the cruel fate of soldiers to be ordered to do, they desired to
be told when they were passing the burial place of Washington, and stood
uncovered on deck as long as they were within sight of Mount Vernon. Any
in England who happen to know how deeply disgraced their country was by
the actors in this expedition, will feel what the power must have been
which, breathing from that shore, humanised for the hour the cowardly
plunderers as they floated by. But it was Washington, the man, not the
President, who moved them to uncover their heads. It is Washington, the
man, not the President, whose name is lovingly spoken, whose picture
smiles benignly in every inhabited nook of his own congregation of
republics. It is even Washington, the man, not the President, whose name
is sacred above all others, to men of all political parties. It was
Washington, the man, who united the votes of all parties in his
presidentship, since, so far from pretending to agree with all, he took
and left, without fear or favour, what convictions he could or could not
adopt from each. The one impression which remains of his presidentship
is its accordance with himself. Had it been, in any respect, a lower
self, there would have been little left of Washington in the people now.

Adams came in by the strength of the federal party. Supported by the
slave States, and all the federalism of the north, he had the means, if
any President ever had, of leaving a strong and permanent impression on
the face of affairs. He filled up his offices with federalists.
Everything during his term of office favoured the influence of the
federalists. The nation was almost beside itself with panic at the
political convulsions of Europe. Yet, notwithstanding all this, and Mr.
Adams's great weight of character, giving influence to his partialities,
the people revealed themselves, in the choice of his successor,
staunchly republican.

Jefferson's influence was greater than that of any other President,
except Washington; and the reason is, that his convictions went along
with the national mind. If Jefferson, with the same love of the people,
the same earnestness of temper, and grace of manners, had been in any
considerable degree less democratic, he might have gone creditably
through his term, and have been well spoken of now; but he would not
have been the honourable means of two successors of the same principles
with himself, being brought in; nor would he have lain, as he now does,
at the very heart of the people. At the outset, his state-rights
principle secured him the south, and his philanthropic, democratic
principles, the north. He was popular, almost beyond example. His
popularity could scarcely be increased; but it has never declined. The
common charges against him, of irreligion, of oppression in the
management of his patronage, of disrespect to his predecessors, are
falling into oblivion, while his great acts remain. As to his religion,
whatever might be his creed, its errors or deficiencies, these are still
matters of disagreement among the wise and good; and it is certain that
Jefferson viewed all the realities that came within his ken, with that
calm earnestness which is the true religious spirit. As to the removals
from office, which are still complained of, it should be remembered that
his predecessor had filled as many offices as possible with high
federalists, many of whom provoked their own discharge by their activity
against the government they professed to serve. There is no evidence
that Jefferson went beyond his own principle; and a principle is no
matter of reproach, though it may be of controversy. He says, "Mr.
Adams's last appointment, when he knew he was naming counsellors and
aids for me and not for himself, I shall set aside as far as depends on
me. Officers who have been guilty of gross abuses of office, such as
marshals packing juries, &c., I shall now remove, as my predecessor
ought in justice to have done. The instances will be few, and governed
by strict rule, and not party passion. The right of opinion shall suffer
no invasion from me."--"The remonstrance laments that a change in the
administration must produce a change in the subordinate officers; in
other words, that it should be deemed necessary for all officers to
think with their principal. But on whom does this imputation bear? On
those who have excluded from office every shade of opinion which was not
their's? or on those who have been so excluded? I lament sincerely that
unessential differences of opinion should ever have been deemed
sufficient to interdict half the society from the rights and blessings
of self-government, to proscribe them as unworthy of every trust. It
would have been to me a circumstance of great relief, had I found a
moderate participation of office in the hands of the majority. I would
gladly have left to time and accident to raise them to their just share.
But their total exclusion calls for prompter corrections. I shall
correct the procedure: but, that done, return with joy to that state of
things, when the only questions concerning a candidate shall be, Is he
honest? Is he capable? Is he faithful to the constitution?"[5]

As to his disrespect to Washington and Adams, it should be remembered
what the party heats of the day were; how Washington's cabinet was
divided between France, war, and general liberty; and neutrality, peace,
and care of the people at home. With such a theme of quarrel, it would
have been a wonder if hasty words had not been sometimes spoken on all
sides. Jefferson's ultimate opinion of Washington, written in confidence
to a friend, in 1814, has happily come to light. At the close, he says,
"These are my opinions of General Washington, which I would vouch at the
judgment-seat of God, having been formed on an acquaintance of thirty
years." One extract is enough: "On the whole, his character was, in its
mass, perfect; in nothing bad, in few things indifferent; and it may
truly be said, that never did nature and fortune combine more perfectly
to make a man great, and to place him in the same constellation with
whatever worthies have merited from man an everlasting remembrance."[6]
The friendship in old age between himself and Mr. Adams, and the moral
and intellectual beauty of their close correspondence, are a spectacle
in sight of which all prior party misunderstandings should be forgotten.
There is one infallible test by which to try old men who have had much
to do in the world. If their power and privilege of admiration survive
their knowledge of the world, they are true-hearted; and they occasion
as much admiration as they enjoy. Jefferson stands this test.

His great acts are much heard of. The reduction of taxes and correction
of abuses with which he began his administration; his having actually
done something against slavery; his invariable decision for advocacy or
opposition, in accordance with the true democratic principle, are now
spoken of more frequently than things less worthy to be remembered. His
influence has been greater than that of any other President since
Washington, exactly in proportion to his nearer approach to the national
idea of a chief magistrate.

No great change took place during the administration of his two
successors, Madison and Monroe. They were strong in the strength of his
principles, and of their own characters. Madison's term of office would
have been memorable in history, if he had not immediately followed his
friend Jefferson. Their identity of views, put into practice by Madison,
with the simplest honesty and true modesty, caused less observation than
the same conduct immediately succeeding a federal administration would
have done. Hence the affectation, practised by some, of calling Madison
a tool of Jefferson. Those who really knew Mr. Madison and his public
life, will be amused at the idea of his being anybody's tool.

The reason why John Quincy Adams's administration is little notorious is
somewhat of the same nature. He was a pure President; a strictly moral
man. His good morality was shown in the devotion of his fine powers to
the faithful conduct of evanescent circumstances. His lot was that of
all good Presidents in the quiet days of the republic. He would not use
his small power for harm; and possessed no very great power for
political good.

General Jackson was brought into office by an overpowering majority, and
after a series of strong party excitements. If ever there was a
possibility of a President marking his age, for good or for evil, it
would have been done during Jackson's administration. He is a man made
to impress a very distinct idea of himself on all minds. He has great
personal courage, much sagacity, though frequently impaired by the
strength of his prejudices, violent passions, an indomitable will, and
that devotion to public affairs in which no President has ever failed.
He had done deeds of war which flattered the pride of the people; and in
doing them, he had acquired a knowledge of the people, which has served
him instead of much other knowledge in which he is deficient. He has
known, however, how to obtain the use, though not the reputation, of the
knowledge which he does not possess. Notwithstanding the strength of his
passions, and the awkward positions in which he has placed himself by
the indulgence of his private resentments, his sagacity has served him
well in keeping him a little way a-head of the popular convictions. No
physician in the world ever understood feeling the pulse, and ordering
his practice accordingly, better than President Jackson. Here are all
the requisites for success in a tyrannical administration. Even in
England, we heard rumours in 1828, and again in 1832, about the perils
of the United States, under the rule of a despotic soldier. The cry
revived with every one of his high-handed deeds; with every exercise of
the veto,--which he has used oftener than all the other Presidents put
together,--with every appointment made in defiance of the Senate; with
the removal of the deposites; with his messages of menace to the French
government. Yet to what amounts the power now, at the close of his
administration, of this idol of the people, this man strong in war, and
subtle in council, this soldier and statesman of indomitable will, of
insatiable ambition, with the resources of a huge majority at his
disposal? The deeds of his administration remain to be justified in as
far as they are sound, and undone if they are faulty. Meantime, he has
been able to obtain only the barest majority in the Senate, the great
object of his wrath: he has been unable to keep the slavery question out
of Congress,--the introduction of which is by far the most remarkable
event of his administration. One of the most desponding complaints I
heard of his administration was, not that he had strengthened the
general government--not that his government had tended to
centralisation--not that he had settled any matters to his own
satisfaction, and left the people to reconcile themselves to his
pleasure as they best might,--but that every great question is left
unsettled; that it is difficult now to tell any party by its principles;
that the principles of such affairs as the currency, land, slavery,
internal improvements, &c. remain to be all argued over again.
Doubtless, this will be tiresome to such public men as have entirely and
finally made up their minds on these subjects. To such, nothing can well
be more wearisome than discussion and action, renewed from year to year.
But the very fact that these affairs remain unsettled, that the people
remain unsatisfied about them, proves that the people have more to
learn, and that they mean to learn it. No true friend of his country
would wish that the questions of slavery and currency should remain in
any position that they have ever yet occupied in the United States; and
towards the settlement of the latter of the two, as far as light depends
on collision of opinions, it is certain that no man has done so much,
whether he meant it or not, as President Jackson. The occasional
breaking up and mingling of parties is a necessary circumstance, whether
it be considered an evil or a good. It may be an evil, in as far as it
affords a vantage-ground to unprincipled adventurers; it is a good, in
as far as it leads to mutual understanding, and improves the candour of
partisans. For the rest, there is no fear but that parties will soon
draw asunder, with each a set of distinctive principles as its badge.
Meantime, men will have reason to smile at their fears of the formidable
personage, who is now descending from the presidential chair; and their
enthusiasm will have cooled down to the temperature fixed by what the
event will prove to have been his merits. They will discuss him by their
firesides with the calmness with which men speak of things that are
past; while they keep their hopes and fears to be chafed up at public
meetings, while the orator points to some rising star, or to some cloud
no bigger than a man's hand. Irish emigrants occasionally fight out the
battle of the Boyne in the streets of Philadelphia; but native Americans
bestow their apprehensions and their wrath upon things future; and their
philosophy upon things past. While they do this, it will not be in the
power of any President to harm them much or long.


SECTION III.

STATE GOVERNMENTS.

Never, perhaps, did statesmen begin their task of constitution-making
with so much aid from preceding circumstances as the great men of the
Revolution. A social neighbourhood of colonies, all suffering under
colonial grievances, and all varying in their internal government,
afforded a broad hint of the present system, and fine facilities for
putting it in practice. There was much less speculation in the case than
might appear from a distance; and this fact so far takes away from the
superhuman character of the wisdom which achieved the completion of the
United States' constitution, as to bring the mind down from its state of
amazement into one of very wholesome admiration.

The state governments are the conservative power, enabling the will of
the majority to act with freedom and convenience. Though the nation is
but an aggregation of individuals, as regards the general government,
their division into States, for the management of their domestic
affairs, precludes a vast amount of confusion and discord. Their mutual
vigilance is also a great advantage to their interests, both within each
State, and abroad. No tyrant, or tyrannical party, can remain unwatched
and unchecked. There is, in each State, a people ready for information
and complaint, when necessary; a legislature ready for deliberation; and
an executive ready to act. Many States, in other ages and regions, have
been lost through the necessity of creating their instruments when they
should have been acting. State organisation is never managed without
dispute; and it makes the entire difference in the success of resistance
to aggression whether the necessary apparatus has to be created in haste
and confusion, or whether everything is in readiness for executing the
will of the majority.

Under no other arrangement, perhaps, could the advantage be secured of
every man being, in his turn, a servant of the commonwealth. If the
general government managed everything, the public service would soon
become the privilege of a certain class, or a number of classes of men;
as is seen to be the case elsewhere. The relation and gradation of
service which are now so remarkable a feature in the United States
commonwealth, could never then happen naturally, as they now do. Almost
every man serves in his township in New England, and in the
corresponding ward or section elsewhere; and has his capability tried;
and, if worthy, he serves his county, his State, and finally the Union,
in Congress. Such is the theory: and if not followed up well in
practice, if some of the best men never get beyond serving their
township, and some of the worst now and then get into Congress, the
people are unquestionably better served than if the selection of
servants depended on accident, or the favour of men in power. Whatever
extraneous impediments may interfere with the true working of the
theory, every citizen feels, or ought to feel, what a glorious career
may lie before him. In his country, every road to success is open to
all. There are no artificial disqualifications which may not be
surmounted. All _humbug_, whether of fashion and show, of
sanctimoniousness, of licentiousness, or of anything else, is there
destined to speedy failure and retribution. There is no hereditary
humbug in the United States. If the honest, wise man, feels himself
depressed below the knave, he has, if he did but know it, only to wait
patiently a little while, and he will have his due. Though truth is
equally great everywhere, and equally sure ultimately to prevail, men of
other countries have often to wait till they reach the better country
than all, before they witness this ultimate prevalence, except with the
eye of faith. The young nation over the Atlantic, is indulged, for the
encouragement, with a speedier retribution for her well or ill doings;
and almost every one of her citizens, if he be truly honourable, may
trust to be fitly honoured before he dies.

Another conservative effect of the state governments is the facilities
they afford for the correction of solecisms, the renovation of
institutions as they are outgrown, and the amendment of all unsuitable
arrangements. If anything wants to be rectified in any State, it can be
done on the mere will of the people concerned. There is no imploring of
an uninterested government at a distance--a government so occupied with
its foreign relations as to have little attention to spare for domestic
grievances which it does not feel. There is no waiting any body's
pleasure; nobody's leave to ask. The remedy is so close at hand, those
who are to give it are so nearly concerned, that it may always, and, for
the most part, speedily, be obtained, upon good cause being shown. No
external observance is needed, except of the few and express
prohibitions which the general and state governments have interchanged.

It is amusing to look over the proceedings of the state legislatures for
any one year. Maine amends her libel law, decreeing that proof of truth
shall be admitted as justification. Massachusetts decrees a revision and
consolidation of her laws, and the annihilation of lotteries. Rhode
Island improves her quarantine regulations. Connecticut passes an act
for the preservation of corn-fields from crows. Vermont decrees the
protection of the dead in their graves. New York prohibits the
importation of foreign convicts. New Jersey incorporates a dairy
company. Pennsylvania mitigates the law which authorises imprisonment
for debt. Maryland authorises a geological survey. Georgia enlarges her
law of divorce. Alabama puts children, in certain circumstances, under
the protection of chancery. Mississippi decrees a census. Tennessee
interdicts barbacues in the neighbourhood of camp meetings. Ohio
regulates the care of escheated lands. Indiana prohibits a higher rate
of interest than ten percent. Missouri authorises the conveyance of real
estate by married women. And so on. It seems difficult to imagine how
many abuses can reach an extreme, or be tardy of cure, where the will of
the majority is not only speedily made known, but where the division of
employment is so skilfully arranged that the majority may be trusted to
understand the case on which they are to decide.

It has always appeared to me that much misapprehension is occasioned by
its being supposed that the strength of the general government lies in
the number of its functions; and its weakness in the extent of its area.
To me it appears directly the reverse. A government which has the
management of all the concerns of a people, the greater and the smaller,
preserves its stability by the general interest in its more important
functions. If you desire to weaken it, you must withdraw from its
guardianship the more general and important of its affairs. If you
desire to shield it from cavil and attack, you must put the more local
and partial objects of its administration under other management. If the
general government of the United States had to manage all legislation
and administration within their boundaries, it could hardly hold
together one year. If it had only one function, essential to all, and
impossible to be otherwise fulfilled, there seems no reason why it
should not work prosperously till there are fifty States around it, and
longer. The importance of the functions of the general government
depends partly upon the universality of the interest in them; and partly
upon the numbers included under them. So far, therefore, from the
enlargement of the area of the United States being perilous to the
general government, by making it "cumbrous," as many fear, it seems to
me likely to work a directly contrary effect. There are strong reasons
why an extension of her area would be injurious to her, but I cannot
regard this as one. A government which has to keep watch over the
defence, foreign policy, commerce, and currency, of from twenty-five to
fifty small republics, is safer in the guardianship of its subjects than
if it had to manage these same affairs for one large republic, with the
additional superintendence of its debtors, its libellers, and the crows
of its corn-fields.

Little or no room for rebellion seems to be left under the constitution
of the United States. In the progress of human affairs, familiar evils
expire with worn-out institutions, and new dangers arise out of the
midst of renovated arrangements. Assassinations are the form which
resistance to government assumes in pure despotisms. Rebellion is the
name it bears under governments somewhat more liberal. In the United
States, nothing worse than professed Nullification has yet been heard
of--unless Colonel Burr's secret schemes were indeed treasonable. A
brief account of the South Carolina Nullification may exhibit the
relations, and occasional enmities of the general and states government
in a clearer way than could be done, otherwise than by a narrative of
facts. This little history shows, among many other things, that America
follows the rest of the world in quoting the constitution as a sanction
of the most opposite designs and proceedings: what different sympathies
respond to the word "patriotism;" and of how little avail is the letter
of the constitution, when there is variance as to its spirit.

Georgia laid claim, some years ago, to the Cherokee territory, on the
ground that the United States had no right to make the laws and treaties
by which the Cherokees were protected; that such legislation was
inconsistent with the reserved rights of the sovereign state of Georgia.
Georgia thus acted upon the supposition, that she was to construe the
federal compact in her own way, and proceed according to her own
construction. Congress checked her in this assumption, and rejected her
pretensions by an almost unanimous vote. Soon after the accession of
General Jackson to the presidentship, Georgia, either presuming upon his
favour, or wishing to test his dispositions, began to encroach upon the
Cherokee lands. The Cherokees appealed to the federal government for
protection, under the laws and treaties framed for that very purpose.
The President replied, that Georgia was right in annulling those laws
and treaties, and that the executive could not interfere. The Indian
cause was brought before the Supreme Court. There was difficulty about
the character in which the plaintiffs were to sue, and as to whether
they could sue at all, under that provision of the constitution which
authorises _foreign nations_ to demand justice from the federal
tribunals. The court expressed a strong, opinion however, that the
Cherokees were entitled to protection from the Executive.

The Supreme Court and Georgia were thus brought into opposition, while
the Executive took the part of Georgia. Compassion for the Cherokees was
now swallowed up in anxiety about the decision of the question of state
rights. The Executive had, as yet, only negatively declared himself,
however; and the Supreme Court had not been driven on to deliver a
verdict against the Georgian laws, by which the Cherokees were
oppressed. The topic of the right of a State to annul the laws and
treaties of the federal government was meantime generally discussed; and
reconsideration was forced upon the President.

South Carolina presently followed the example of Georgia. She annulled
the acts of Congress, which regarded such revenue laws as she considered
contrary to general principles, and to her own interests. The President
now perceived that if every State proceeded to nullify the acts of
Congress, upon its own construction of the federal constitution, the
general government could not be secure of its existence for a day. While
the Executive was still in a position of observation, the Supreme Court
pronounced, in another case, a verdict against the unconstitutional laws
of Georgia. In 1829, the legislature of Virginia asserted the right of
each State to construe the federal constitution for itself: and thus
there appeared to be three States already in the course of withdrawing
from the Union.

Congress went on legislating about the tariff, without regard to this
opposition; and the protests of certain States against their proceedings
were quietly laid on the table, as impertinences. The South Carolina
advocates of Nullification worked diligently in their own State to ripen
the people sufficiently to obtain a convention which should proclaim
their doctrine as the will of the State: in which case, they doubted
not that they should secure the countenance and co-operation of most or
all of the southern States. A convention in favour of free trade met at
Philadelphia; another in favour of the tariff met at New York; and the
nullifiers saw reason to turn the discussion of the quarrel as much as
possible from the principle of Nullification to the principle of free
trade. They perceived the strength of the latter ground, whether or not
they saw the weakness of the former; and by their skilful movement upon
it, they eventually caused a greater benefit to the nation, than their
discontent did harm to themselves.

The President was invited to dine at Charleston on the 4th of July,
1831; and in his answer, he thought fit to announce that he should do
his duty in case of any attempt to annul the laws of the Union. This was
a virtual retractation of his encouragement to Georgia. A committee of
the legislature of South Carolina reported the letter to be at variance
with the duties of the President, and the rights of the States. The heat
was rising rapidly. The nullifiers were loud in their threats, and
watchful in observing the effect of those threats abroad. North Carolina
repudiated the whole doctrine of Nullification: other neighbouring
States showed a reluctance to sanction it. The President's next message
recommended a modification of the tariff, which was known to be no
favorite of his; but the modification he proposed had no other bearing
than upon the amount of the revenue.

During the session of Congress of 1832, various alterations were made in
the duties, which it was hoped would be to the satisfaction of South
Carolina: but the complaint of her representatives was, that the
reductions which were ordained were on those articles in which she had
no interest; while her burdens were actually increased. These
representatives met at Washington, and drew up an address to the people
of South Carolina, in which they declared their wrongs, and inquired
whether they were to be tamely submitted to.

The legislature of South Carolina, after the next election, exhibited a
large majority in both houses in favour of Nullification. A convention
was called at Columbia, in consequence of whose proceedings an ordinance
was prepared, and speedily passed through the legislature, declaring all
the acts of Congress imposing duties on imported goods, to be null and
void within the state of South Carolina. It prohibited the levying of
all such duties within the State, and all appeals on the subject to the
Supreme Court. A number of minor provisions were made to hinder the levy
of import duties. The governor was empowered to call the militia into
service against any opposition which might be made by the general
government to this bold mode of proceeding. The entire military force of
the State, and the services of volunteers, were also placed at his
disposal. Arms and ammunition were ordered to be purchased.

This was too much for the President's anxiety about consistency. He
ordered all the disposable military force to assemble at Charleston;
sent a sloop of war to that port, to protect the federal officers in the
discharge of their duties; and issued a vigorous proclamation, stating
the constitutional doctrine, about the mutual relations of the general
and state governments, and exhorting the citizens of South Carolina not
to forfeit their allegiance. Governor Hayne issued a counter
proclamation, warning the citizens of the State against being seduced
from their state allegiance by the President. This was at the close of
1832.

Everything being thus ready for an explosion, South Carolina, appeared
willing to wait the result of another session. This was needful enough;
for she was as yet uncertain whether she was to have the assistance of
any of her sister States. Mr. Calhoun, the vice-president, resigned his
office, and became a senator in the room of governor Hayne: and thus the
nullification cause was in powerful hands in the senate. Its proceedings
were watched with the most intense anxiety by the whole Union. The
crisis of the Union was come.

In the discontented State, the union party, which was strong, though
excluded from the government, was in great sorrow and fear. Civil war
seemed inevitable; and they felt themselves oppressed and insulted by
the imposition of the oath of allegiance to the State. The nullifiers
justified this requisition by saying that many foreigners resident in
Charleston, who did not understand the case, believed that their duty to
the general government required them to support it, while its vessels of
war and troops were in port; however well they might be disposed to the
nullification cause. It was merely as a method of enlightenment, it was
protested, that this oath was imposed.

The ladies, meanwhile, had a State Rights ball at the arsenal, and
contributed their jewels for the support of the expected war. I could
not learn that they made lint--the last test of woman's earnestness for
war; but I was told by a leading nullifier that the ladies were "chock
full of fight." The expectation of war was so nearly universal that I
could hear of only one citizen of Charleston who discouraged the removal
of his wife and children from the city, in the belief that a peaceful
settlement of the quarrel would take place.

The legislatures of the States passed resolutions, none of them
advocating nullification; (even Georgia forsaking that ground;) many
condemned the proceedings of South Carolina; but some, while doing so,
made strong remonstrances against the tariff. Five of the States, in
which manufactures had been set up, declared their opposition to any
alteration of the tariff. It is amusing now to read the variety of terms
in which the South Carolina proceedings were condemned; though, at the
time, the reports of these resolutions must have carried despair to the
hearts of the citizens of the solitary discontented State. The effect of
these successive shocks is still spoken of in strong and touching
language by those who had to sustain them.

While the South Carolina militia were training, and the munitions of war
preparing, the senators and representatives of the State were wearing
stern and grave faces at Washington. The session was passing away, and
nothing but debate was yet achieved. Their fellow legislators looked on
them with grief, as being destined to destruction in the field, or on
the scaffold. They were men of high spirit and gallantry; and it was
clear that they had settled the matter with themselves and with each
other. They would never submit to mere numbers; and would oppose force
to force, till all of their small resources was spent. No one can
estimate their heroism, or desperation, whichever it may be called, who
has not seen the city and State which would have been the theatre of the
war. The high spirit of South Carolina is of that kind which accompanies
fallen, or inferior fortunes. Pride and poverty chafe the spirit. They
make men look around for injury, and aggravate the sense of injury when
it is real. In South Carolina, the black population outnumbers the
white. The curse of slavery lies heavy on the land, and its inhabitants
show the usual unwillingness of sufferers to attribute their maladies to
their true cause. Right as the South Carolinians may be as to the
principle of free trade, no tariff ever yet occasioned such evils as
they groan under. If not a single import duty had ever been imposed,
there would still have been the contrasts which they cannot endure to
perceive between the thriving States of the north and their own. Now,
when they see the flourishing villages of New England, they cry "We pay
for all this." When the north appears to receive more favour from the
general government, in its retrospective recompenses for service in war,
the greater proportion of which service was rendered by the north, the
south again cries, "We pay for all this." It is true that the south pays
dearly; but it is for her own depression, not for others' prosperity.
When I saw the face of the nullifiers' country, I was indeed amazed at
their hardihood. The rich soil, watered by full streams, the fertile
bottoms, superintended by the planters' mansions, with their slave
quarter a little removed from the house, the fine growth of trees, and
of the few patches of pasturage which are to be seen, show how
nourishing this region ought to be. But its aspect is most depressing to
the traveller. Roads nearly impassable in many parts, bridges carried
away and not restored, lands exhausted, and dwellings forsaken, are
spectacles too common in South Carolina. The young men, whose patrimony
has deteriorated, migrate westward with their 'force;' selling their
lands, if they can; if not, forsaking them. There are yet many
plantations of unsurpassed fertility; but there are many exhausted: and
it is more profitable to remove to a virgin soil than to employ slave
labour in renovating the fertility of the old. There is an air of
rudeness about the villages, and languor about the towns, which promise
small resource in times of war and distress. And then, the wretched
slave population is enough to paralyse the arm of the bravest community,
and to ensure defeat to the best cause. I saw the soldiers and the
preparations for war at Charleston, two years after the crisis was past.
When I was to be shown the arms and ammunition, it appeared that "the
gentleman that had the key was not on the premises." This showed that no
immediate invasion was expected; but it was almost incredible what had
been threatened with such resources. The precautionary life of the
community, on account of the presence of so large a body of slaves, may
be, in some sort, a training for war; but it points out the impediments
to success. If South Carolina had, what some of her leading men seem to
desire, a Lacedemonian government, which should make every free man a
soldier, she would be farther from safety in peace, and success in war,
than any quaker community, exempt from the curse of a debased and
wronged servile class. One glance over the city of Charleston is enough
to show a stranger how helpless she is against a foreign foe, if
unsupported. The soldiers met, at every turn, the swarms of servile
blacks, the very luxuries and hospitalities of the citizens, grateful as
these luxuries are to the stranger, and honourable as these
hospitalities are to his entertainers, betoken a state of society which
has no strength to spare from the great work of self-renovation. Those
who remained at home during the winter of 1832 and 1833, might be
hopeful about the conflict, from being unaware of the depressed
condition of their State, in comparison with others: but the leaders at
Washington might well look stern and grave. It is no impeachment of
their bravery, if their hearts died within them, day by day.

The session was within fourteen days of its close, when Mr. Clay brought
in a bill which had been carefully prepared as a compromise between the
contending parties. It provided that all import duties exceeding twenty
per cent. should be gradually reduced, till, in 1842, they should have
declined to that amount; leaving liberty to augment the duties again, in
case of war. This bill, with certain amendments, not affecting its
principle, was passed, as was the Enforcing Bill,--for enforcing the
collection imposed by act of Congress. A convention was held in South
Carolina: the obnoxious ordinance was repealed; the Enforcing Bill was,
indeed, nominally nullified; but no powers were offered to the
legislature for enforcing the nullification; and the quarrel was, to all
intents and purposes, at an end.

The triumph remained,--if triumph there were,--with South Carolina. This
was owing to the goodness of her principle of free trade; and in no
degree, to the reasonableness of her nullifying practices. The passage
of the Compromise Bill was a wise and fortunate act. Its influence on
the planting and manufacturing interests is a subject to be considered
in another connexion. Its immediate effect in honourably reconciling
differences which had appeared irreconcileable, was a blessing, not only
to the United States, but to the world. The lustre of democratic
principles would have been shrouded to many eyes by a civil war among
the citizens of the Union; while now, the postponement of a danger so
imminent, the healing of a breach so wide, has confirmed the confidence
of many who feared that the States remained united only for want of a
cause of separation.

Some ill effects remain,--especially in the irritation of South
Carolina. There is still an air of mystery and fellowship about the
leading nullifiers, and of disquiet among the Union men of Charleston.
But there is cause enough for restlessness in Charleston, as I have
before said; and much excuse for pique.

Meanwhile, these events have proved to thousands of republicans the
mischief of compromise conveyed in vague phraseology, in so solemn an
instrument as a written constitution.

There could not have been a doubt on this case, if the question of
construction had not had place, from the unfortunate clause ordaining
that the general government shall have all powers necessary for the
fulfilment of certain declared purposes. While this provision, thus
worded, remains, the nullification theory will be played off, from time
to time. The good consequence will arise from this liability, that a
habit will be formed of construing the constitution liberally, with
regard to the States, wherever there is a doubt as to the exercise of
its powers; but this collateral good is no justification of the
looseness of language by which the peace and integrity of the Union have
been made to hang on a point of construction. The people of the United
States will probably show their wisdom in henceforth accepting the
benefit by shunning the evil.

In the privacy of their houses, many citizens have lamented to me, with
feelings to which no name but grief can be given, that the events of
1832--3 have suggested the words "use" or "value of the Union." To an
American, a calculation of the value of the Union would formerly have
been as offensive, as absurd, as an estimate of the value of religion
would be to a right-minded man. To Americans of this order, the Union
has long been more than a matter of high utility. It has been idealised
into an object of love and veneration. In answer to this _cui bono_,
many have cried in their hearts, with Lear, "O reason not the need!" I
was struck with the contrast in the tone of two statesmen, a chief
nullifier and one of his chief opponents. The one would not disguise
from me that the name of the Union had lost much of its charm in the
south, since 1830. The other, in a glow, protested that he never would
hear of the Union losing its charm.

But the instances of carelessness, of levity about the Union, are very
rare; and this is the reason why more show of attachment to it is not
made. The probabilities of the continuance of the Union are so
overwhelming, that no man, not in a state of delusion, from some strong
prejudice, can seriously entertain the idea of a dissolution within any
assignable period. I met with one gentleman in the north, a clergyman,
who expects and desires a dissolution of the Union, saying that the
north bore all the expense of the war, and has had nothing but
obstruction and injury from the south. I saw, also, one gentleman in
South Carolina, who sees no use in the Union, but much expense and
trouble. He declares the only effect of it to be the withdrawing of the
best men from each State to dawdle away their time at Washington.
Another, who desponds about the condition of England, and whose views
are often embellished, and sometimes impaired, by his perceptions of
analogy, expressed his fears that his own country, an offset from mine,
would share the fate of offsets, and perish with the parent. But these
are examples of eccentricity.

There are many among the slave-holders of the south who threaten
secession. Such of these as are in earnest are under the mistake into
which men fall when they put everything to the hazard of one untenable
object. The untenable object once relinquished, the delusion will clear
away with the disappearance of its cause, and the Union will be to them,
with good reason, dearer than it has ever been. The southern States
could not exist, separately, with their present domestic institutions,
in the neighbourhood of any others. They would have thousands of miles
of frontier, over which their slaves would be running away, every day of
the year. In case of war, they might be only too happy if their slaves
did run away, instead of rising up against them at home. If it was
necessary to purchase, Florida because it was a retreat for runaways; if
it was necessary, first to treat with Mexico for the restitution of
runaways, and then to steal Texas, the most high-handed theft of modern
times; if it is necessary to pursue runaways into the northern States,
and to keep magistrates and jails in perpetual requisition for the
restitution of southern human property, how would the southern States
manage by themselves? Only by ridding themselves of slavery; in which
case, their alleged necessity of separation is superseded. As for their
resources,--the shoe-business of New York State is of itself larger and
more valuable than the entire commerce of Georgia,--the largest and
richest of the southern States.

The mere act of separation could not be accomplished. In case of war
against the northern States, it would be necessary to employ half the
white population to take care of the black; and of the remaining half,
no one would undertake to say how many are at heart sick and weary of
slavery, and would be, therefore, untrustworthy. The middle slave
States, now nearly ready to discard slavery, would seize so favourable
an opportunity as that afforded them by the peril of the Union. The
middle free States, from Pennsylvania to the Mississippi, having
everything to lose by separation, and nothing to gain, would treat the
first overt act as rebellion; proceeding against it, and punishing it as
such. The case is so palpable as scarcely to need even so brief a
statement as this. The fact which renders such a statement worth making
is, that most of those who threaten the dissolution of the Union, do it
in order to divert towards this impracticable object the irritation
which would otherwise, and which will, ere long, turn against the
institution of slavery. The gaze of the world is fixed upon this
institution. The world is shouting the one question about this anomaly
which cannot be answered. The dwellers in the south would fain be
unconscious of that awful gaze. They would fain not hear the
reverberation of that shout. They would fain persuade themselves and
others, that they are too busy in asserting their rights and their
dignity as citizens of the Union, to heed the world beyond.

This self and mutual deception will prove a merely temporary evil. The
natural laws which regulate communities, and the will of the majority,
may be trusted to preserve the good, and to remove the bad elements from
which this dissension arises. It requires no gift of prophecy to
anticipate the fate of an anomaly among a self-governing people. Slavery
was not always an anomaly; but it has become one. Its doom is therefore
sealed; and its duration is now merely a question of time. Any anxiety
in the computation of this time is reasonable; for it will not only
remove a more tremendous cause than can ever again desolate society, but
restore the universality of that generous attachment to their common
institutions which has been, and will be, to the American people,
honour, safety, and the means of perpetual progress.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] The Federalist, vol. i. p. 277.

[4] Correspondence, vol. iv. p. 396.

[5] Jefferson's Correspondence, vol. iii. pp. 467-476.

[6] Jefferson's Correspondence, vol. iv. p. 236.




CHAPTER III.

MORALS OF POLITICS.

     "'Tis he whose law is reason; who depends
     Upon that law as on the best of friends;
     Whence, in a state where men are tempted still
     To evil for a guard against worse ill,
     And what in quality or act is best,
     Doth seldom on a right foundation rest,
     He fixes good on good alone, and owes
     To virtue every triumph, that he knows."

     _Wordsworth._


Under a pure despotism, the morals of politics would make but a very
short chapter. Mercy in the ruler; obedience in his officers, with,
perhaps, an occasional stroke of remonstrance; and taxpaying in the
people, would comprehend the whole. Among a self-governing people, who
profess to take human equality for their great common principle, and the
golden rule for their political vow, a long chapter of many sections is
required.

The morals of politics are not too familiar anywhere. The clergy are apt
to leave out its topics from their list of subjects for the pulpit.
Writers on morals make that chapter as brief as if they lived under the
pure despotism, supposed above. An honest newspaper, here and there, or
a newspaper honest for some particular occasion, and therefore
uninfluential in its temporary honesty, are the only speakers on the
morals of politics. The only speakers; but not the only exhibitors.
Scattered here and there, through a vast reach of ages, and expanse of
communities, there may be found, to bless his race, an honest statesman.
Statesmen, free from the gross vices of peculation, sordid, selfish
ambition, cruelty and tergiversation, are not uncommon. But the last
degree of honesty has always been, and is still, considered incompatible
with statesmanship. To hunger and thirst after righteousness has been
naturally, as it were, supposed a disqualification for affairs; and a
man, living for truth, and in a spirit of love, "pure in the last
recesses of the mind," who should propose to seek truth through
political action, and exercise love in the use of political influence,
and refine his purity by disinfecting the political atmosphere of its
corruptions, would hear it reported on every hand that he had a demon.
Yet one who is aware of the enthusiasm with which the Germans hail the
words of Posa at every representation of Don Carlos; one who has seen
how American officials are supported by the people, on the supposition
that they are great men, (however small such men may really be,) one who
has watched the acceleration, within our own time, of the retribution
which overtakes untrustworthy public men, whatever may be their talents
and their knowledge, in contrast with the comparative stability of less
able, but more honest men, can doubt no longer that the time is at hand
for the advent of political principle. The hour is come when dwellers in
the old world should require integrity of their rulers; and dwellers in
the new world, each in his turn a servant of society, should require it
of each other and of themselves. The people of the United States are
seeking after this, feebly and dimly. They have retained one wise saying
of the fathers to whom they owe so much; that the letter of laws and
constitutions is a mere instrument; with no vitality; no power to
protect and bless; and that the spirit is all in all. They have been far
from acting upon this with such steadiness as to show that they
understand and believe it. But the saying is in their minds; and, like
every other true thing that lies there, it will in time exhibit itself
in the appointed mode--the will of the majority.


SECTION I.

OFFICE.

I was told two things separately, last year, which, if put together,
seem to yield an alarming result. I was told that almost every man holds
office, some time during his life; and that holding one is the ruin of
moral independence. The case is not, however, nearly so bad as this.
There is a kind of public life which does seem to injure the morals of
all who enter it; but very few are affected by this. Office in a man's
own neighbourhood, where his character and opinions are known, and where
the honour and emolument are small, is not very seductive: and these are
the offices filled by the greater number of citizens who serve society.
The temptation to propitiate opinion becomes powerful when a citizen
desires to enter the legislature, or to be the chief magistrate of the
State. The peril increases when he becomes a candidate for Congress; and
there seems to be no expectation whatever that a candidate for the
presidentship, or his partizans, should retain any simplicity of speech,
or regard to equity in the distribution of places and promises. All this
is dreadfully wrong. It originates in a grand mistake, which cannot be
rectified but by much suffering. It is obvious that there must be
mistake; for it can never be an arrangement of Providence that men
cannot serve each other in their political relations without being
corrupted.

The primary mistake is in supposing that men cannot bear to hear the
truth. It has become the established method of seeking office, not only
to declare a coincidence of opinion with the supposed majority, on the
great topics on which the candidate will have to speak and act while in
office, but to deny, or conceal, or assert anything else which it is
supposed will please the same majority. The consequence is, that the
best men are not in office. The morally inferior who succeed, use their
power for selfish purposes, to a sufficient extent to corrupt their
constituents, in their turn. I scarcely knew, at first, how to
understand the political conversations which I heard in travelling. If a
citizen told another that A. had voted in a particular manner, the other
invariably began to account for the vote. A. had voted thus to please
B., because B.'s influence was wanted for the benefit of C., who had
promised so and so to A.'s brother, or son, or nephew, or leading
section of constituents. A reason for a vote, or other public
proceeding, must always be found; and any reason seemed to be taken up
rather than the obvious one, that a man votes according to the decision
of his reason and conscience. I often mentioned this to men in office,
or seeking to be so; and they received it with a smile or a laugh which
wrung my heart. Of all heart-withering things, political scepticism in a
republic is one of the most painful. I told Mr. Clay my observations in
both kinds. "Let them laugh!" cried he, with an honourable warmth: "and
do you go on requiring honesty; and you will find it." He is right: but
those who would find the highest integrity had bettor not begin their
observations on office-holders, much less on office-seekers, as a class.
The office-holder finds, too often, that it may be easier to get into
office than to have power to discharge its duties when there: and then
the temptation to subservience, to dishonest silence, is well nigh too
strong for mortal man. The office-seeker stands committed as desiring
something for which he is ready to sacrifice his business or profession,
his ease, his leisure, and the quietness of his reputation. He stands
forth as either an adventurer, a man of ambition, or of self-sacrificing
patriotism. Being once thus committed, failure is mortifying, and the
allurement to compromise, in order to success, is powerful. Once in
public life, the politician is committed for ever, whether he
immediately perceives this, or not. Almost every public man of my
acquaintance owned to me the difficulty of retiring,--in mind, if not in
presence,--after the possession of a public trust. This painful
hankering is part of the price to be paid for the honours of public
service: and I am disposed to think that it is almost universal; that
scarcely any man knows quiet and content, from the moment of the success
of his first election. The most modest men shrink from thus committing
themselves. The most learned men, generally speaking, devote themselves,
in preference, to professions. The most conscientious men, generally
speaking, shun the snares which fatally beset public life, at present,
in the United States.

A gentleman of the latter class, whose talents and character would
procure him extensive and hearty support, if he desired it, told me,
that he would never serve in office, because he believes it to be the
destruction of moral independence: he pointed out to me three friends of
his, men of remarkable talent, all in public life. "Look at them," said
he, "and see what they might have been! Yet A. is a slave, B. is a
slave, and C. is a worm in the dust." Too true.

Here is a grievous misfortune to the republic! My friend ascribes it to
the want of protection from his neighbours, to which a man is exposed
from the want of caste. This will never do. A crown and sceptre would be
about as desirable in a republic as caste. If men would only try the
effect of faith in one another, I believe they would take rank, and
yield protection, with more precision and efficacy than by any
manifestation of the exclusive spirit that was ever witnessed. Of
course, this proposal will be called "Quixotic;" that convenient term
which covers things the most serious and the most absurd, the wisest and
the wildest. I am strengthened in my suggestion by a recurrence to the
first principles of society in the United States, according to which I
find that "rulers derive their just powers from the consent of the
governed;" and that the theory is, that the best men are chosen to
serve. Both these pre-suppose mutual faith. Let the governed once
require honesty as a condition of their consent; let them once choose
the best men, according to their most conscientious conviction, and
there will be an end of this insulting and disgusting political
scepticism. Adventurers and ambitious men there will still be; but they
will not taint the character of the class. Better men, who will respect
their constituents, without fearing or flattering them, will foster the
generous mutual faith which is now so grievously wanting; and the spirit
of the constitution, now drooping in some of its most important
departments, will revive.

I write more in hope than in immediate expectation. I saw much ground
for hope, but very much also for grief. Scarcely anything that I
observed in the United States caused me so much sorrow as the
contemptuous estimate of the people entertained by those who were bowing
the knee to be permitted to serve them. Nothing can be more disgusting
than the contrast between the drawing-room gentleman, at ease among
friends, and the same person courting the people, on a public occasion.
The only comfort was a strong internal persuasion that the people do not
like to be courted thus. They have been so long used to it, that they
receive it as a matter of course; but, I believe, if a candidate should
offer, who should make no professions but of his opinions, and his
honest intentions of carrying them out; if he should respect the people
as men, not as voters, and inform them truly of his views of their
condition and prospects, they would recognise him at once as their best
friend. He might, notwithstanding, lose his election; for the people
must have time to recover, or to attain simplicity; but he would serve
them better by losing his election thus, than by the longest and most
faithful service in public life.

I have often wondered whether a gentleman at Laporte, in Indiana, who
advertised his desire to be sheriff, gained his election. He declared in
his advertisement that he had not been largely solicited, but that it
was his own desire that he should be sheriff: he would not promise to do
away with mosquitoes, ague, and fever, but only to do his duty. This
candidate has his own way of flattering his constituents.

A gentleman of considerable reputation offered, last year, to deliver a
lecture, in a Lyceum, in Massachusetts. It was upon the French
Revolution; and on various accounts curious. There was no mention of the
causes of the Revolution, except in a parenthesis of one sentence,
where he intimated that French society was not in harmony with the
spirit of the age. He sketched almost every body concerned, except the
Queen. The most singular part, perhaps, was his estimate of the military
talents of Napoleon. He exalted them much, and declared him a greater
general than Wellington, but not so great as Washington. The audience
was large and respectable. I knew a great many of the persons present,
and found that none of them liked the lecture.

I attended another Lyceum lecture in Massachusetts. An agent of the
Colonisation Society lectured; and, when he had done, introduced a
clergyman of colour, who had just returned from Liberia, and could give
an account of the colony in its then present state. As soon as this
gentleman came forward, a party among the audience rose, and went out,
with much ostentation of noise. Mr. Wilson broke off till he could be
again heard, and then observed in a low voice, "that would not have been
done in Africa;" upon which, there was an uproar of applause, prolonged
and renewed. All the evidence on the subject that I could collect, went
to prove that the people can bear, and do prefer to hear, the truth. It
is a crime to withhold it from them; and a double crime to substitute
flattery.

The tone of the orations was the sole, but great drawback from the
enjoyment of the popular festivals I witnessed. I missed the celebration
of the 4th of July,--both years; being, the first year, among the
Virginia mountains, (where the only signs of festivity which I saw, were
some slaves dressing up a marquee, in which their masters were to feast,
after having read, from the Declaration of Independence, that all men
are created free and equal, and that rulers derive their just powers
from the consent of the governed;) and the second year on the lakes,
arriving at Mackinaw too late in the evening of the great day for any
celebration that might have taken place. But I was at two remarkable
festivals, and heard two very remarkable orations. They were represented
to me as fair or favourable specimens of that kind of address; and, to
judge by the general sum of those which I read and heard, they were so.

The valley of the Connecticut is the most fertile valley in New England;
and it is scarcely possible that any should be more beautiful. The
river, full, broad, and tranquil as the summer sky, winds through
meadows, green with pasture, or golden with corn. Clumps of forest trees
afford retreat for the cattle in the summer heats; and the magnificent
New England elm, the most graceful of trees, is dropped singly, here and
there, and casts its broad shade upon the meadow. Hills of various
height and declivity bound the now widening, now contracting valley. To
these hills, the forest has retired; the everlasting forest, from which,
in America, we cannot fly. I cannot remember that, except in some parts
of the prairies, I was ever out of sight of the forest in the United
States and I am sure I never wished to be so. It was like the "verdurous
wall of Paradise," confining the mighty southern and western rivers to
their channels. We were, as it appeared, imprisoned in it for many days
together, as we traversed the south-eastern States. We threaded it in
Michigan; we skirted it in New York and Pennsylvania; and throughout New
England it bounded every landscape. It looked down upon us from the
hill-tops; it advanced into notice from every gap and notch in the
chain. To the native it must appear as indispensable in the
picture-gallery of nature as the sky. To the English traveller it is a
special boon, an added charm, a newly-created grace, like the infant
planet that wanders across the telescope of the astronomer. The English
traveller finds himself never weary by day of prying into the forest,
from beneath its canopy: or, from a distance drinking in its exquisite
hues: and his dreams, for months or years, will be of the mossy roots,
the black pine, and silvery birch stems, the translucent green shades of
the beech, and the slender creeper, climbing like a ladder into the
topmost boughs of the dark holly, a hundred feet high. He will dream of
the march of the hours through the forest; the deep blackness of night,
broken by the dun forest-fires, and startled by the showers of sparks,
sent abroad by the casual breeze from the burning stems. He will hear
again the shrill piping of the whip-poor-will, and the multitudinous din
from the occasional swamp. He will dream of the deep silence which
precedes the dawn; of the gradual apparition of the haunting trees,
coming faintly out of the darkness; of the first level rays,
instantaneously piercing the woods to their very heart, and lighting
them up into boundless ruddy colonnades, garlanded with wavy verdure,
and carpeted with glittering wild-flowers. Or, he will dream of the
clouds of gay butterflies, and gauzy dragon-flies, that hover above the
noon-day paths of the forest, or cluster about some graceful shrub,
making it appear to bear at once all the flowers of Eden. Or the golden
moon will look down through his dream, making for him islands of light
in an ocean of darkness. He may not see the stars but by glimpses; but
the winged stars of those regions,--the gleaming fire-flies,--radiate
from every sleeping bough, and keep his eye in fancy busy in following
their glancing, while his spirit sleeps in the deep charms of the summer
night. Next to the solemn and various beauty of the sea and the sky,
comes that of the wilderness. I doubt whether the sublimity of the
vastest mountain-range can exceed that of the all-pervading forest, when
the imagination becomes able to realise the conception of what it is.

In the valley of the Connecticut, the forest merely presides over the
scene, giving gravity to its charm. On East Mountain, above Deerfield,
in Massachusetts, it is mingled with grey rocks, whose hue mingles
exquisitely with its verdure. We looked down from thence on a long reach
of the valley, just before sunset, and made ourselves acquainted with
the geography of the catastrophe which was to be commemorated in a day
or two. Here and there, in the meadows, were sinkings of the soil,
shallow basins of verdant pasturage, where there had probably once been
small lakes, but where cattle were now grazing. The unfenced fields,
secure within landmarks, and open to the annual inundation which
preserves their fertility, were rich with unharvested Indian corn; the
cobs left lying in their sheaths, because no passer-by is tempted to
steal them; every one having enough of his own. The silvery river lay
among the meadows; and on its bank, far below us, stretched the avenue
of noble trees, touched with the hues of autumn, which shaded the
village of Deerfield. Saddleback bounded our view opposite, and the
Northampton hills and Green Mountains on the left. Smoke arose, here and
there, from the hills' sides, and the nearer eminences were dotted with
white dwellings, of the same order with the homesteads which were
sprinkled over the valley. The time is past when a man feared to sit
down further off than a stone's throw from his neighbours, lest the
Indians should come upon him. The villages of Hadley and Deerfield are a
standing memorial of those times, when the whites clustered together
around the village church, and their cattle were brought into the area,
every night, under penalty of their being driven off before morning.
These villages consist of two rows of houses, forming a long street,
planted with trees; and the church stands in the middle. The houses, of
wood, were built in those days with the upper story projecting; that the
inhabitants, in case of siege, might fire at advantage upon the Indians,
forcing the door with tomahawks.

I saw an old house of this kind at Deerfield,--the only one which
survived the burning of the village by the French and Indians, in 1704,
when all the inhabitants, to the number of two hundred and eighty, being
attacked in their sleep, were killed or carried away captive by the
Indians. The wood of the house was old and black, and pierced in many
parts with bullet-holes. One had given passage to a bullet which shot a
woman in the neck, as she rose up in bed, on hearing the tomahawk strike
upon the door. The battered door remains, to chill one's blood with the
thought that such were the blows dealt by the Indians upon the skulls of
their victims, whether infants or soldiers.

This was not the event to commemorate which we were assembled at
Deerfield. A monument was to be erected on the spot where another body
of people had been murdered, by savage foes of the same race. Deerfield
was first settled in 1671; a few houses being then built on the present
street, and the settlers being on good terms with their neighbours. King
Philip's war broke out in 1675, and the settlers were attacked more than
once. There was a large quantity of grain stored up at Deerfield; and it
was thought advisable to remove it for safety to Hadley, fifteen miles
off. Captain Lothrop, with eighty men, and some teams, marched from
Hadley to remove the grain; his men being the youth and main hope of
the settlements around. On their return from Deerfield, on the 30th of
September 1675, about four miles and a half on the way to Hadley, the
young men dispersed to gather the wild grapes that were hanging ripe in
the thickets, and were, under this disadvantage, attacked by a large
body of Indians. It was afterwards discovered that the only way to
encounter the Indians is in phalanx. Captain Lothrop did not know this;
and he posted his men behind trees, where they were, almost to a man,
picked off by the enemy. About ninety-three, including the teamsters,
fell. When all was over, help arrived. The Indians were beaten; but they
appeared before the village, some days after, shaking the scalps and
bloody garments of the slain captain and his troop, before the eyes of
the inhabitants. The place was afterwards abandoned by the settlers,
destroyed by the Indians, and not rebuilt for some years.

This was a piteous incident in the history of the settlement; but it is
not easy to see why it should be made an occasion of commemoration, by
monument and oratory, in preference to many others which have a stronger
moral interest attaching to them. Some celebrations, like that of
Forefather's Day, are inexpressibly interesting and valuable, from the
glorious recollections by which they are sanctified. But no virtue was
here to be had in remembrance; nothing but mere misery. The
contemplation of mere misery is painful and hurtful; and the only
salutary influence that I could perceive to arise from this occasion was
a far-fetched and dubious one,--thankfulness that the Indians are not
now at hand to molest the white inhabitants. Then occurs the question
about the Indians,--"where are they?" and the answer leaves one less
sympathy than one would wish to have with the present security of the
settler. The story of King Philip, who is supposed to have headed, in
person, the attack on Lothrop's troop, is one of the most melancholy in
the records of humanity; and sorrow for him must mingle with
congratulations to the descendants of his foes, who, in his eyes, were
robbers. With these thoughts in my mind, I found it difficult to
discover the philosophy of this celebration. A stranger might be
pardoned for being so slow.

One of the then candidates for the highest office in the State, is
renowned for his oratory. He is one of the most accomplished scholars
and gentlemen that the country possesses. It was thought, "by his
friends," that his interest wanted strengthening in the western part of
the State. The people were pleased when any occasion procured them the
_éclat_ of bringing a celebrated orator over to address them. The
commemoration of an Indian catastrophe was thought of as an occasion
capable of being turned to good electioneering purposes.--Mr. Webster
was invited to be the orator, it being known that he would refuse. "Not
I," said he. "I won't go and rake up old bloody Indian stories." The
candidate was next invited, and, of course, took the opportunity of
"strengthening his interest in the western part of the State." I was not
aware of this till I sometime after heard it, on indisputable authority.
I should have enjoyed it much less than I did, if I had known that the
whole thing was got up, or its time and manner chosen, for
electioneering objects; that advantage was taken of the best feelings of
the people for the political interest of one.

The afternoon of the 29th we went to Bloody Brook, the fearfully-named
place of disaster. We climbed the Sugar-loaf; a high, steep hill, from
whose precipitous sides is obtained a view of the valley which pleases
me more than the celebrated one from Mount Holyoke, a few miles off.
Each, however, is perfect in its way; and both so like heaven, when one
looks down upon the valley in the light of an autumn afternoon,--such a
light as never yet burnished an English scene,--that no inclination is
left to make comparisons. The ox team was in the fields, the fishers on
the banks of the grey river,--banks and fishers reflected to the
life,--all as tranquil as if there was to be no stir the next day.

On descending, we went to the Bloody Brook Inn, and saw the strange and
horrible picture of the slaughter of Lothrop's troop; a picture so bad
as to be laughable; but too horrible to be laughed at. Every man of the
eighty exactly alike, and all looking scared at being about to be
scalped. We saw, also, the long tables spread for the feast of
to-morrow. Lengths of unbleached cotton for table cloths, plates and
glasses, were already provided. Some young men were bringing in long
trails of the wild vine, clustered with purple grapes, to hang about the
young maple trees which overshadowed the tables; others were trying the
cannon. We returned home in a state of high expectation.

The morning of the 30th was bright, but rather cold. It was doubtful how
far prudence would warrant our sitting in an orchard for several hours,
in such a breeze as was blowing. It was evident, however, that persons
at a distance had no scruples on the subject, so thickly did they throng
to the place of meeting. The wagon belonging to the band passed my
windows, filled with young ladies from the High School at Greenfield.
They looked as gay as if they had been going to a fair. By half-past
eight, our party set off, accompanied by a few, and passing a great
number of strangers from distant villages.

After having accomplished our drive of three or four miles, we warmed
ourselves in a friendly house, and repaired to the orchard to choose our
seats, while the ceremony of laying the first stone of the monument was
proceeding at some distance. The platform from which the orator was to
address the assemblage was erected under a rather shabby walnut-tree,
which was rendered less picturesque by its lower branches being lopped
off, for the sake of convenience. Several men had perched themselves on
the tree; and I was beginning to wonder how they would endure their
uncomfortable seat, in the cold wind, for three hours, when I saw them
called down, and dismissed to find places among the rest of the
assemblage, as they sent down bark and dust upon the heads of those who
sat on the platform. Long and deep ranges of benches were provided; and
on these, with carriage cushions and warm cloaks, we found ourselves
perfectly well accommodated. Nothing could be better. It was a pretty
sight. The wind rustled fitfully in the old walnut-tree. The audience
gathered around, it were sober, quiet; some would have said dull. The
girls appeared to me to be all pretty, after the fashion of American
girls. Every body was well-dressed; and such a thing as ill-behaviour in
any village assemblage in New England, is, I believe, unheard of. The
soldiers were my great amusement; as they were on the few other
occasions when I had the good fortune to see any. Their chief business,
on the present occasion, was to keep clear the seats which were reserved
for the band, now absent with the procession. These seats were
advantageously placed; and new-comers were every moment taking
possession of them, and had to be sent, disappointed, into the rear. It
was moving to behold the loving entreaties of the soldiers that these
seats might be vacated. I saw one, who had shrunk away from his
uniform, (probably from the use of tobacco, of which his mouth was
full,) actually put his arm round the neck of a gentleman, and smile
imploringly in his face. It was irresistible, and the gentleman moved
away. It is a perfect treat to the philanthropist to observe the pacific
appearance of the militia throughout the United States. It is well known
how they can fight, when the necessity arises: but they assuredly look,
at present, as if it was the last thing in their intentions:--as I hope
it may long be.

The band next arrived, leading the procession of gentlemen, and were
soon called into action by the first hymn. They did their best; and, if
no one of their instruments could reach the second note of the German
Hymn, (the second note of three lines out of four,) it was not for want
of trying.

The oration followed. I strove, as I always did, not to allow difference
of taste, whether in oratory, or in anything else, to render me
insensible to the merit, in its kind, of what was presented to me: but,
upon this occasion, all my sympathies were baffled, and I was deeply
disgusted. It mattered little what the oration was in itself, if it had
only belonged in character to the speaker. If a Greenfield farmer or
mechanic had spoken as he believed orators to speak, and if the failure
had been complete, I might have been sorry or amused, or disappointed;
but not disgusted. But here was one of the most learned and accomplished
gentlemen in the country, a candidate for the highest office in the
State, grimacing like a mountebank before the assemblage whose votes he
desired to have, and delivering an address, which he supposed level to
their taste and capacity. He spoke of the "stately tree," (the poor
walnut,) and the "mighty assemblage," (a little flock in the middle of
an orchard,) and offered them shreds of tawdry sentiment, without the
intermixture of one sound thought, or simple and natural feeling, simply
and naturally expressed. It was equally an under estimate of his
hearers, and a degradation of himself.

The effect was very plain. Many, I know, were not interested, but were
unwilling to say so of so renowned an orator. All were dull; and it was
easy to see that none of the proper results of public speaking followed.
These very people are highly imaginative. Speak to them of what
interests them, and they are moved with a word. Speak to those whose
children are at school, of the progress and diffusion of knowledge, and
they will hang upon the lips of the speaker. Speak to the
unsophisticated among them of the case of the slave, and they are ready
to brave Lynch-law on his behalf. Appeal to them on any religious or
charitable enterprise, and the good deed is done, almost as soon as
indicated. But they have been taught to consider the oratory of set
persons on set occasions as a matter of business or of pastime. They
listen to it, make their remarks upon it, vote, perhaps, that it shall
be printed, and go home, without having been so much moved as by a dozen
casual remarks, overheard upon the road.

All this would be of little importance, if these orations consisted of
narrative,--or of any mere matter of fact. The grievance lies in the
prostitution of moral sentiment, the clap-trap of praise and pathos,
which is thus criminally adventured. This is one great evil. Another, as
great, both to orators and listeners, is the mis-estimate of the people.
No insolence and meanness can surpass those of the man of sense and
taste who talks beneath himself to the people, because he thinks it
suits them. No good parent ventures to do so to his youngest child; and
a candidate for office who will do it, shows himself ignorant of that
which it is most important he should know,--what fidelity of deference
every man owes to every other man. Is such a one aware that he is
perpetually saying in his heart, "God! I thank thee that I am not as
other men are?"

The other festival, to which I have alluded, was the celebration of
Forefathers' Day;--of the landing of the Pilgrims on Plymouth Rock. I
trust that this anniversary will be hailed with honour, as long as
Massachusetts overlooks the sea. A more remarkable, a nobler enterprise,
was never kept in remembrance by a grateful posterity, than the
emigration of the Pilgrim Fathers; and their posterity are, at least, so
far worthy of them as that they all, down to the young children, seem to
have a clear understanding of the nature of the act, and the character
of the men. I never beheld the popular character in a more cheering
light than on this occasion; and, if I happened to be acquainted with a
misanthrope, I would send him to Plymouth, to keep Forefathers' Day.
Every fact that I review, every line that I write, brings back
delightful feelings towards some of the affectionate and hospitable
friends through whose kindness I saw and learned whatever I learned of
their country; but to none am I more thankful than to those who took me
to Plymouth, and those who welcomed me there. It was an occasion when
none could be on any other terms than pure brotherhood with all the
rest. It was the great birth-day of the New England people; and none
could fail to wish the people joy.

My party and I reached Plymouth from Hingham the day before the
celebration. As we drew near the coast, I anxiously watched the
character of the scenery, trying to view it with the eyes of the first
emigrants. It must have struck a chill to their hearts;--so bare, so
barren, so wintry. The firs grew more and more stunted, as we approached
the sea; till, as one of my companions observed, they were ashamed to
show themselves any smaller, and so turned into sand. Mrs. Hemans calls
it, in her fine lyric, a rock-bound coast; naturally enough, as she was
told that the pilgrims set their feet on a rock, on landing; but that
rock was the only one. The coast is low and sandy. The aspect of the bay
was, this day, most dreary. We had travelled through snow, all the way
behind; snowy fields, with here and there a solitary crow stalking in
the midst; and now, there was nothing but ice before us. Dirty, grey
ice, some sheeted, some thrown up by the action of the sea into heaps,
was all that was to be seen, instead of the blue and glittering sea. A
friend assured me, however, that all would be bright and cheering the
next morning; informing me, with a smile, that in the belief of the
country people, it never did rain or snow, and never would rain or snow,
on Forefathers' Day. This is actually a superstition firmly held in the
neighbourhood. This friend pointed out to me, in the course of the
afternoon, how the green grass was appearing through the snow on Burial
Hill, on whose slope the descending sun, warm for December, was shining.
We mounted Burial Hill; and when I trod the turf, after some weeks'
walking over crisp snow, I began to feel that I might grow superstitious
too, if I lived at Plymouth.

Upwards of half the pilgrim company died the first winter. Fifty-one
dropped in succession; and the graves of most of them are on this hill.
Burial Hill was probably chosen to be a _memento mori_ to the pious
pilgrims; its elevation, bristling with grave-stones, being conspicuous
from every part of the town. But, lest it should exhibit their tale of
disaster to their foes, the Indians, the colonists sowed the place of
their dead with corn; making it, for honest purposes, a whited
sepulchre. From this eminence, we saw the island in the harbour where
the fathers landed for service on the first Sunday after their arrival;
also, the hill on which stood a wigwam, from whence issued an Indian to
hold the first parley. A brook flowed between the two hills, on which
stood the Indian and the chief of the intruders. Governor Winslow
descended to the brook; bridged it with stepping-stones, in sight of the
Indian; laid down his arms, and advanced. The meeting was friendly; but
there was so little feeling of security, for long after, that when half
the colonists had perished, the rest were paraded round and round a hut
on Burial Hill, to conceal the smallness of their numbers from the
vigilant Indians.

We went to the Registry Office, and saw the earliest records of the
colony,--as far back as 1623,--in the handwriting of the fathers. Among
them is a record of the lots of land appointed to those who came over in
the Mayflower. (Little did the builders of that ship dream how they were
working for immortality!) Sometimes a cow is appointed, with a lot, to
six families. Sometimes a black goat. The red cow is ordained to be kept
for the poor, to calve.

The rock on which the pilgrims first landed, has been split, and the top
part, in order to its preservation, removed within an iron railing, in
front of Pilgrim Hall. The memorable date of the landing, 1620, is
painted upon it; and the names of the fathers, in cast-iron, are
inserted into the railing which surrounds the rock.

Within the Hall, a plain, spacious building, erected within ten years,
to serve as the scene of the festivities of Forefathers' Day, and also
as a Museum of Pilgrim curiosities, is a picture, by Sargent, of the
Landing of the Pilgrims. Samosat, the Indian chief, is advancing, with
English words of greeting,--"Welcome, Englishmen!" Elder Brewster, and
the other fathers, with their apprehensive wives and wondering children,
form an excellent group; and the Mayflower is seen moored in the
distance. The greatest defect in the picture is the introduction of the
blasted tree, which needlessly adds to the desolation of the scene, and
gives a false idea, as far as it goes. I could not have anticipated the
interest which these memorials would inspire. I felt as if in a dream,
the whole time that I was wandering about with the rejoicing people,
among the traces of the heroic men and women who came over into the
perilous wilderness, in search of freedom of worship.

Forefathers' Day rose bright and mild. I looked out towards the harbour.
Every flake of ice was gone, and the deep blue sea rippled and sparkled
in the sun. The superstition was fated to endure another year, at least.
All Plymouth was in a joyous bustle, with lines of carriages, and groups
of walkers. After breakfast, we proceeded to the church, to await the
orator of the day. We were detained on the steps for a few minutes, till
the doors should be opened; and I was glad of it, for the sun was warm,
and the _coup d'oeil_ was charming. There was one long descent from the
church down to the glittering sea; and on the slope were troops of gay
ladies, and lines of children; with here and there a company of little
boys, playing soldiers to the music of the band, which came faintly from
afar. Of real soldiers, I saw two during the day. There might be more;
but none were needed. The strangest association of all was of a Pilgrim
Ode sung to the tune of "God save the King!" an air which I should have
supposed no more likely to be chosen for such an occasion than as an
epilogue to the Declaration of Independence. It did very well, however.
It set us all singing so as to drown the harmony of the violins and
horns which acted as instigation.

The oration was by an ex-senator of the United States. It consisted
wholly of an elaboration of the transcendent virtues of the people of
New England. His manner was more quiet than that of any other orator I
heard; and I really believe that there was less of art than of weakness
and bad taste in his choice of his mode of address. Nothing could be
imagined worse,--more discordant with the fitting temper of the
occasion,--more dangerous to the ignorant, if such there were,--more
disgusting to the wise, (as I know, on the testimony of such,)--more
unworthy of one to whom the ear of the people was open. He told his
hearers of the superiority of their physical, intellectual, and moral
constitution to that of their brethren of the middle and southern
States, to that of Europeans, and all other dwellers in the earth; a
superiority which forbade their being ever understood and appreciated by
any but themselves. He spoke especially of the intensity of the New
England character, as being a hidden mystery from all but natives. He
contrasted the worst circumstances of European society, (now in course
of correction,) with the best of New England arrangements, and drew the
obvious inferences. He excused the bigotry of the Pilgrim Fathers, their
cruel persecution of the Quakers, and other such deeds, on the ground
that they had come over to have the colony to themselves, and did not
want interlopers. He extenuated the recent mobbing practices in New
England, on the ground of their rarity and small consequences, and
declared it impossible that the sons of the pilgrims should trust to
violence for the maintenance of opinion. This last sentiment, the only
sound one that I perceived in the oration, was loudly cheered. The whole
of the rest, I rejoice to say, fell dead.

The orator was unworthy of his hearers. He had been a senator of the
United States, and had, I was told, discharged his duty there; but he
was little fit for public life, if he did not know that it is treason to
republicanism to give out lower morals in public than are held in
private; to smile or sigh over the vanity of the people by the fireside,
and pamper it from the rostrum; to use the power of oratory to injure
the people, instead of to save. In this case, the exaggeration was so
excessive as to be, I trust, harmless. No man of common sense could be
made to believe that any community of mortal men has ever been what the
orator described the inhabitants of New England to have attained. I was
deeply touched by the first remark I heard upon this oration. A lady,
who had been prevented from attending, asked me, on my return, home, how
I liked the address. Before I could open my lips to reply, her daughter
spoke. "I am heart-sick of this boasting. When I think of our
forefathers, I want to cry, 'God be merciful to us sinners!'" If the
oration awakened in others, as I believe it did, by force of contrast,
feelings as healthful, as faithful to the occasion as this, it was not
lost, and our pity must rest upon the orator.

I am aware,--I had but too much occasion to observe,--how this practice
of flattering the people from the rostrum is accounted for, and, as a
matter of fact, smiled at by citizens of the United States. I know that
it is considered as a mode, inseparable from the philosophy of politics
there. I dissent from this view altogether. I see that the remedy lies,
not wholly where remedies for the oppression of severe natural laws
lie,--in a new combination of outward circumstances,--but in the
individual human will. The people may have honest orators if they
choose to demand to hear the truth. The people will gladly hear the
truth, if the appointed orator will lay aside selfish fears and desires,
and use his high privilege of speaking from the bottom of his soul. If,
in simplicity, he delivers to the people his true and best self, he is
certain to gain the convictions of many, and the sympathies of all; and
his soul will be clear of the guilt of deepening the pit under the feet
of the people, while trying to persuade them that they are treading on
firm ground. What is to be said of guides who dig pitfalls?

The day closed delightfully. Almost everybody went to pay respect to an
aged lady, then eighty-eight, a regular descendant of one of the
pilgrims. She was confined to the sofa, but retained much beauty, and
abundant cheerfulness. She was delighted to receive us, and to
sympathise in those pleasures of the day which she could not share. I
had the honour of sitting in the chair which her ancestor brought over
from England, and of feeling the staple by which it was fastened in the
Mayflower.

The dinner being over, the gentlemen returned to their several abodes,
to escort the ladies to the ball in Pilgrim Hall. I went, with a party
of seven others, in a stage coach; every carriage, native and exotic,
being in requisition to fill the ball-room, from which no one was
excluded. It was the only in-door festival, except the President's
levee, where I witnessed an absolutely general admission; and its aspect
and conduct were, in the highest degree, creditable to the intelligence
and manners of the community. There were families from the islands in
the bay, and other country residences, whence the inhabitants seldom
emerge, except for this festival. The dress of some of the young ladies
was peculiar, and their glee was very visible; but I saw absolutely no
vulgarity. There was much beauty, and much elegance among the young
ladies, and the manners of their parents were unexceptionable. There was
evidence in the dancing, of the "intensity" of which we had heard so
much in the morning. The lads and lasses looked as if they meant never
to tire; but this enjoyment of the exercise pleased me much more than
the affectation of dancing, which is now fashionable in the large
cities. I never expect to see a more joyous and unexceptionable piece of
festivity than the Pilgrim ball of 1835.

The next day, the harbour was all frozen over; and the memory of the
blue, rippling sea of Plymouth, is therefore, with me, sacred to
Forefathers' Day.

I was frequently reminded by friends of what is undoubtedly very true,
the great perils of office in the United States, as an excuse for the
want of honesty in officials. It is perfectly true that it is ruin to a
professional man without fortune, to enter public life for a time, and
then be driven back into private life. I knew a senator of the United
States who had served for nearly his twice six years, and who then had
to begin life again, as regarded his profession. I knew a representative
of the United States, a wealthy man, with a large family, who is
doubting still, as he has been for a few years past, whether he shall
give up commerce or public life, or go on trying to hold them both. He
is rich enough to devote himself to public life; but at the very next
election after he has relinquished his commercial affairs, he may be
thrown out of politics. I see what temptations arise in such cases, to
strain a few points, in order to remain in the public eye; and I am
willing to allow for the strength of the temptation.

But the part for honest men to take is to expose the peril, to the end
that the majority may find a remedy; and not to sanction it by yielding
to it. Let the attention of the people be drawn towards the salaries of
office, that they may discover whether they are too low; which is best,
that adventurers of bad character should now and then get into office,
because they have not reputation enough to obtain a living by other
means, or that honest and intelligent men should be kept out, because
the prizes of office are engrossed by more highly educated men; and
whether the rewards of office are kept low by the democratic party, for
the sake of putting in what their opponents call 'adventurers,' or by
the aristocratic, with the hope of offices being engrossed by the men of
private fortune. Let the true state of the case, according to each
official's view of it, be presented to the people, rather than any
countenance be given to the present dreadful practice of wheedling and
flattery; and the perils of office will be, by some means, lessened.

The popular scandal against the people of the United States, that they
boast intolerably of their national institutions and character, appears
to me untrue: but I see how it has arisen. Foreigners, especially the
English, are partly to blame for this. They enter the United States with
an idea that a republic is a vulgar thing: and some take no pains to
conceal their thought. To an American, nothing is more venerable than a
republic. The native and the stranger set out on a misunderstanding. The
English attacks, the American defends, and, perhaps, boasts. But the
vain-glorious flattery of their public orators is the more abundant
source of this reproach; and it rests with the people to redeem
themselves from it. For my own part, I remember no single instance of
patriotic boasting, from man, woman, or child, except from the rostrum;
but from thence there was poured enough to spoil the auditory for life,
if they had been simple enough to believe what they were told. But they
were not.


SECTION II.

NEWSPAPERS.

Side by side with the sinners of the rostrum, stand the sinners of the
newspaper press. The case is clear, and needs little remark or
illustration. The profligacy of newspapers, wherever they exist, is a
universal complaint; and, of all newspaper pressed I never heard any one
deny that the American is the worst. Of course, this depravity being so
general throughout the country, it must be occasioned by some
overpowering force of circumstances. The causes are various; and it is a
testimony to the strength and purity of the democratic sentiment in the
country, that the republic has not been overthrown by its newspapers.

While the population is so scattered as it now is, throughout the
greater part of the Union, nothing is easier than to make the people
know only one side of a question; few things are easier than to keep
from them altogether the knowledge of any particular affair; and, worse
than all, on them may easily be practised the discovery that lies may
work their intended effect, before the truth can overtake them.

It is hard to tell which is worst; the wide diffusion of things that are
not true, or the suppression of things that are true. It is no secret
that some able personage at Washington writes letters on the politics
and politicians of the general government, and sends them to the
remotest corners of the Union, to appear in their newspapers; after
which, they are collected in the administration newspaper at Washington,
as testimonies of public opinion in the respective districts where they
appear. It is no secret that the newspapers of the south keep out of
their columns all information which might enlighten their readers, near
and afar, as to the real state of society at home. I can testify to the
_remarkable events_ which occur in the southern States, unnoticed by any
press, and transpiring only through accident. Two men were burned alive,
without trial, by the gentlemen of Mobile, just before my arrival there;
and no newspaper even alluded to the circumstance, till, many months
after, a brief and obscure paragraph, in a northern journal, treated it
as a matter of hearsay.

It is no secret that the systematic abuse with which the newspapers of
one side assail every candidate coming forward on the other, is the
cause of many honourable men, who have a regard to their reputation,
being deterred from entering public life; and of the people being thus
deprived of some better servants than any they have. Though a faithful
public servant should be able to endure all the consequences of faithful
service, yet there are many cases where men, undecided as to their
choice of public and private life, are fixed in favour of the latter by
this one circumstance. It is the one obstacle too much. A public man in
New England gave me the history of an editor of a newspaper, who began
his professional course by making an avowed distinction between telling
lies in conversation and in a newspaper, where every body looks for
them. Of course, he has sunk deeper and deeper in falsehood; but
retribution has not yet overtaken him. My informant told me, that this
editor has made some thousands of dollars by his abuse of one man; and
jocosely proposed, that persons who are systematically railed at by any
newspaper, should lay claim to a proportion of the profits arising out
of the use of their names and characters.

The worst of it is, that the few exceptions to this depravity,--the few
newspapers conducted by men of truth and superior intelligence, are not
yet encouraged in proportion to their merits. It is easy to see how a
youth, going into the wilds, to set up a newspaper for the neighbouring
villages, should meet with support, however vicious or crude his
production maybe; but it is discouraging to perceive how little
preference is given, in the Atlantic cities, to the best journals over
the worst. Still, there is a preference; and it appears to be on the
increase; and that increase, again, is in proportion to the intrepidity
of the paper in discussing affairs as they arise.

There will be no great improvement in the literary character of the
American newspapers till the literature of the country has improved.
Their moral character depends upon the moral taste of the people. This
looks like a very severe censure. If it be so, the same censure applies
elsewhere, and English morals must be held accountable for the slanders
and captiousness displayed in the leading articles of British journals,
and for the disgustingly jocose tone of their police reports, where
crimes are treated as entertainments, and misery as a jest. Whatever may
be the exterior causes of the Americans having been hitherto ill-served
in their newspapers, it is now certain that there are none which may not
be overpowered by a sound moral taste. In their country, the demand lies
with the many. Whenever the many demand truth and justice in their
journals, and reject falsehood and calumny, they will be served
according to their desire.

This desire is beginning to awaken. Some months before I left the
United States, a man of colour was burned alive, without trial, at St.
Louis, in Missouri; a large assemblage of the "respectable" inhabitants
of the city being present. No one supposed that anybody out of the State
of Missouri was any further implicated with this deed, than as men have
an interest in every outrage done to man. The interest which residents
in other States had in this deed, was like that which an Englishman has
in a man being racked in the Spanish Inquisition; or a Frenchman, in a
Turk being bastinadoed at Constantinople. He is not answerable for it,
or implicated in it, as a fellow-citizen; and he speaks his humane
reprobation as a fellow-man. Certain American citizens, out of Missouri,
contrived, however, to implicate themselves in the responsibility for
this awful outrage, which, one would have thought, any man would have
been thankful to avoid. The majority of newspaper editors made
themselves parties to the act, by refusing, from fear, to reprobate it.
The state of the case was this, as described to me by some inhabitants
of St. Louis. The gentlemen of the press in that city dared not
reprobate the outrage, for fear of the consequences from the murderers.
They merely announced the deed, as a thing to be regretted, and
recommended that the veil of oblivion should be drawn over the affair.
Their hope was widely different from their recommendation. They hoped
that the newspapers throughout the Union would raise such a chorus of
execration as would annihilate the power of the executioners. But the
newspapers of the Union were afraid to comment upon the affair, because
they saw that the St. Louis editors were afraid. The really respectable
inhabitants of that disgraced city were thrown almost into despair by
this dastardly silence, and believed all security of life and property
in their State to be at an end. A few journals were honest enough to
thunder the truth in the ears of the people; and the people awoke to
perceive how their editors had involved themselves in this crime, by a
virtual acquiescence,--like the unfaithful mastiff, if such a creature
there be, which slinks away from its master's door, to allow a passage
to a menacing thief. The influence of the will of the awakening people
is already seen in the improved vigour in the tone of the newspapers
against outrage. On occasion of the more recent riots at Cincinnati, the
editorial silence has been broken by many voices.

There is a spirited newspaper at Louisville which has done its duty
well, on occasions when it required some courage to do it; informing the
Cincinnati people of the meanness of their conduct in repressing the
expression of opinion, lest it should injure the commerce between Ohio
and Kentucky; and also, justifying Judge Shaw of Massachusetts, against
the outcries of the South, for a judgment he lately gave in favour of
the release of a slave, voluntarily carried into a free State. Two New
York papers, the New York American and the Evening Post, have gained
themselves honour by intrepidity of the same kind, and by the
comparative moderation and friendliness of their spirit. I hope that
there may be many more, and that their number may be perpetually on the
increase.

The very best newspaper that I saw in the United States was a single
number of the Cleveland Whig, which I picked up at an hotel in the
interior of Ohio. I had seen spirited extracts from it in various
newspapers. The whole of this particular number was valuable for the
excellence of its spirit, and for its good sense. It had very important,
and some very painful subject matter,--instances of overbearing the
law,--to treat of. It was so done as nearly to beguile me, hungry
traveller as I was, of my dinner, and of all thought of my journey.

One other remarkable paper lies before me: remarkable for its professing
to be conducted on principles of exact justice, and for its accordance
with its principles to a degree which has hardly been dreamed of in a
publication of its kind. There is something heroic in the enterprise,
which inspires a strong hope of its success. If the ability be but
sufficient to sustain it,--of which there seems no reason to
doubt,--there can be no question of its acceptableness. The just and
gentle construction of human actions, and the cheerful and trustful mood
in surveying natural events, are more congenial with the general mind,
than captiousness and distrust towards men, and despondency under the
government of God. Such men as the editor of the Boston Reformer are
sure to command the sympathies of men, however they may appear to run
counter to the supposed tastes of newspaper readers. The following
notice to correspondents is a novelty in its place,--more striking than
any announcements in the news columns.

"To correspondents.--Our paper is no vehicle of vulgar abuse, or
spiteful attacks on persons or institutions. Our design is to avoid
everything which appeals to or pleases any bad propensity in our nature.
Doubtless there are a thousand petty annoyances somewhat grievous to be
borne; but we cannot go about to redress them. The best way is to
forgive and forget them. We cannot waste our strength on little matters.
We know no way to do good to man, to make society really better, but to
suppress our anger, keep our temper, show an elevated mind and a good
heart. We must look for the good, not for the bad in men, and always
put the best construction we can on all their doings."--_Boston
Reformer._


SECTION III.

APATHY IN CITIZENSHIP.

In England the idea of an American citizen is of one who is always
talking politics, canvassing, bustling about to make proselytes abroad,
buried in newspapers at home, and hurrying to vote on election days.

There is another side to the object. A learned professor of a western
college told me abundance of English news, but declared himself ignorant
of everything that had passed in the home portion of the political
world. He never took any interest in politics. What would be the use of
his disturbing himself? How far does one man's vote go? He does more
good by showing himself above such affairs.

It was communicated to me that there are more modes of political action
than one: and that, though this professor does not vote, he uses his
utmost influence with the students of his college, in favour of his own
political opinions; and with entire success. If this be true, the
gentleman falls short of his duty in one respect, and exceeds it in
another.

A clergyman in the north was anxious to assure me that elections are
merely personal matters, and do not affect the happiness of the people.
It matters not to him, for instance, who is in office, and what party in
politics is uppermost: life goes on the same to him. This gentleman had
probably never heard of the old lady who said that she did not care
what revolutions happened, as long as she had her roast chicken, and her
little game at cards. But that old lady did not live in a republic, or
perhaps even she might have perceived that there would have been no
security for roast chickens and cards, if all were to neglect political
action but those who want political power and profit. In a democracy,
every man is supposed to be his own security for life and property: and,
if a man devolves his political charge upon others, he must lay his
accounts for not being so well taken care of as he might be. So much for
the selfish aspect of the case;--the view which might have been
presented, with illustrations, to the old lady, if she had happened to
live in a republic.

The clergyman ought to see further. He ought to see, in virtue of his
office, how public morals must suffer under the neglect of public duty
by respectable men. If such men were to perform the duties of citizens
as conscientiously as they do those of husbands, fathers, and pastors,
and leave it to the knaves to neglect the duties of citizenship, the
republic might go on as well as a republic with knaves in it can go on.
But if the case is reversed,--if the knaves are eager to use their
political rights for selfish purposes, and the conscientious in other
respects are remiss in the duties of citizenship, the pastors may almost
as well leave off preaching. All good pastoral influence will be borne
down by the spread of corruption. The clergy may preach themselves
hoarse to little purpose, if they live, and encourage others to live, in
the avowed neglect of the first duty of any one relation; and the
exercise of the suffrage is the first duty of republican citizenship.

A naval officer, a man of an otherwise sound head and heart, told me,
very coolly, that he had never voted more than twice in his life. His
defence, in answer to my remonstrance, was, that he had served his
country in other ways. In as far as this might be meant to convey that
he could not vote at New York when in India, the excuse must be admitted
as valid: but, if it was meant to apply to elections going on before his
eyes, it was much the same as if he had said, "there is no occasion for
me to be a good father, because I have been a good son."

A member of Congress gave me instances of what would have been the
modifications of certain public affairs, but for the apathy of the
minority about the use of their suffrage. If citizens regulate their
exertions by the probabilities of immediate success, instead of by their
faith in their own convictions, it is indeed no wonder if the minority
leave everything to their adversaries; but this is not the way for men
to show themselves worthy of the possession of political rights. This is
not the way that society has advanced. This is not the way that security
for life and property has been obtained for those idle citizens who are
now leaving that security to the mercy of those whom they believe to be
the enemies of society.

A public man told me that it would be a great point gained, if every
citizen could be induced to vote, at least once a year. So far is it
from being true that all Americans are the bustling politicians the
English have been apt to suppose. If such political bustle should be
absurd, the actual apathy is something worse. If it were only borne in
mind that rulers derive their just powers from the consent of the
governed, surely all conscientious men would see the guilt of any man
acquiescing in the rule of governors whom he disapproves, by not having
recorded his dissent. Or, if he should be in the majority, the case is
no better. He has omitted to bear his testimony to what he esteems the
true principles of government. He has not appointed his rulers; and, in
as far as he accepts their protection, he takes without having given, he
reaps without having sown; he deprives his just rulers of a portion of
the authority which is their due--of a portion of the consent of the
governed.

There is another cause for the reluctance to vote which is complained of
by the best friends of the people; but it is almost too humbling and
painful to be discussed. Some are afraid to vote!

This happens not in the country, nor among the strength of the
population in the towns: but among the feeble aristocracy. There is not,
in the United States, as with us, a system of intimidation exercised by
the rich over the poor. In the country, there are no landlords and
tenants at will. In the towns, the tradesmen do not stand in need of the
patronage of the rich. Though they vote by ballot, and any man who
chooses it may vote secretly, (and many do upon occasion,) there is
rarely any need of such protection. But there is no reason why the
gentry, who may be afraid of hurting one another's feelings, should not
use their power of secret voting, rather than neglect the duty of giving
their suffrage. If the educated and principled men of the community, as
they are esteemed, fall back into idleness and silence, when the time
comes for a struggle for principles, and there is a danger of
disappointing expectations, and hurting feelings, their country has
little to thank them for. They are the men from whom the open discharge
of duty is looked for; they are the men who should show that political
obligation is above private regards. If they have not the virtue to do
this, and take the consequences, let them avail themselves of the
secrecy of the ballot-box, which in England is desired for the
protection of those whom bad arrangements have made dependent for bread
on the rich and powerful. At all events, let them vote, or be ashamed to
accept the privileges of citizenship without having discharged the
duties.

The fear of opinion sometimes takes the form of an almost insane dread
of responsibility. There are occasions when public men, unable to judge
for themselves of particular classes of circumstances, are obliged to
ask advice of their friends and supporters. Happy he who obtains a full
and true answer from any one! The chances against this are in proportion
to the importance of the case. I knew of one such instance, the result
of which more than one is, I trust, now grieving over in his inmost
heart. An eminent statesman was hesitating whether to offer himself as a
candidate for a very high office. He requested the opinion and advice of
a number of gentlemen in public life, his supporters. All were of the
same opinion; that he should not stand. No one of them chose to take the
responsibility of telling him so. Some of them wrote ambiguous answers,
hoping that he would infer that they thought ill of his chance. Others
rather encouraged the enterprise. The illustrative details which might
be given,--showing the general uniformity, with particular diversity, of
the conduct of the advisers,--would be amusing if they were not too sad.
Suffice it that no one, as far as I could learn, could get over his fear
of responsibility so as to be faithful. They allowed their idol to make
a fool of himself. If he should henceforth be sunk in political
scepticism, perhaps these gentlemen may find that in shunning one kind
of responsibility, they have incurred another, far heavier.

It is felt, and understood, in the United States, that their near future
in politics is indiscernible. Odd, unexpected circumstances,
determining the present, are perpetually turning up. Almost every man
has his convictions as to what the state of affairs will be, in the
gross, a century hence. Scarcely any man will venture a conjecture as to
what will have happened next spring. This is the very condition, if the
people could but see it, for the exercise of faith in principles. With a
dark and shifting near future, and a bright and fixed ultimate destiny,
what is the true, the only wisdom? Not to pry into the fogs and thickets
round about, or to stand still for fear of what may next occur in the
path; but to look from Eden gate behind to heaven gate before, and press
on to the certain future. In his political as in his moral life, man
should, in the depth of his ignorance and the fallibility of his
judgment, throw himself, in a full sense of security, upon principles;
and then he is safe from being depressed by opposition, or scared by
uncertainty, or depraved by responsibility.


SECTION IV.

ALLEGIANCE TO LAW.

It is notorious that there is a remarkable failure in this department of
political morals among certain parties in the United States. The mobbing
events of the last few years are celebrated; the abolition riots in New
York and Boston; the burning of the Charleston Convent; the bank riots
at Baltimore; the burning of the mails at Charleston; the hangings by
Lynch-law at Vickesburgh; the burning alive of a man of colour at St.
Louis; the subsequent proceedings there towards the students of Marion
College; and the abolition riots at Cincinnati. Here is a fearful list!

The first question that arises is, who has done these things? Whose
hands have lighted green fagots round a living man? and strung up a
dozen or twenty citizens on the same gallows? and fired and razed
houses; and sent a company of trembling nuns flying for their lives at
midnight? Here is evidence enough of ignorance,--of desperate, brutal
ignorance. Whose ignorance?

In Europe, the instantaneous and natural persuasion of men who hear the
tidings is, that the lowest classes in America have risen against the
higher. In Europe, desperate, brutal ignorance is the deepest curse in
the cursed life of the pauper and the serf. In Europe, mobbing is
usually the outbreak of exasperated misery against laws which oppress,
and an aristocracy which insults humanity. Europeans, therefore,
naturally assume that the gentry of the United States are the sinned
against, and the poor the sinners, in their social disturbances. They
draw conclusions against popular government, and suppose it proved that
universal suffrage dissolves society into chaos. They picture to
themselves a rabble of ragged, desperate workmen, with torches in their
hands; while the gentry look on in dismay, or tremble within their
houses.

It is not so. I was informed, twenty times over, by gentlemen, that the
Boston mob of last year was wholly composed of gentlemen. The only
working man in it was the truck-man who saved the victim. They were the
gentlemen of St. Louis who burned the black man, and banished the
students of Marion College. They were the gentlemen of Cincinnati who
denounced the abolitionists, and raised the persecution against them.
They were the magistrates and gentry of Vickesburgh who hanged
way-farers, gamblers, and slaves in a long row. They were the gentlemen
of Charleston who broke open the Post Office, and violated its sacred
function, to the insult and injury of the whole country.

The case is plain. There are no paupers to rise against oppressive laws
in a country, where the laws are made by all, and where pauperism is
thereby excluded. There is no degraded class, subject to insults from
the highest, which can be resented only by outrage. The assumption is a
false one, that ignorance and poverty, knowledge and wealth, go
together. Mobbing for European causes, and in European modes, is
absolutely precluded where political rights are universal, and political
power equally diffused through all classes.

The very few European causes which are in analogy with United States
mobbing, are those riots for opinion, which bear only a subordinate
relation to politics; such as the Birmingham riots, and the attempt of
the Liverpool merchants to push Clarkson into the dock. The cases are
very similar. The mobs of America are composed of high churchmen, (of
whatever denomination,) merchants and planters, and lawyers.

One complete narrative of a riot, for the fidelity of which I can vouch,
will expose the truth of the case better than a list of deeds of horror
which happened beyond my sight. It is least revolting, too, to treat of
a case whose terror lies in its existence, more than in its
consequences. The actors in the riot, which it was my fortune to
understand, were scarcely less guilty than if they had bathed their
hands in blood; but it is easier to examine, undisturbed by passion, the
case of those whose hands are, to the outward eye, clean.

A very few years ago, certain citizens in New England began to discover
that the planters of the south were making white slaves in the north,
nearly as successfully as they were propagating black slavery in the
territories of the south and west. Charleston and Boston were
affectionate friends in old times, and are so still, notwithstanding the
hard words that passed between them in nullification days: that is, the
merchants and professional men of Boston are fond of Charleston, on
account of their commercial relations. This attachment has been carried
to such an extreme as to be almost fatal to the liberties of some of the
best citizens of the northern city. They found their brothers dismissed
from their pastoral charges, their sons expelled from colleges, their
friends excluded from professorships, and themselves debarred from
literary and social privileges, if they happened to entertain and
express opinions unfavourable to the peculiar domestic institution by
which Charleston declares it to be her intention to abide. Such is the
plea of those citizens of Boston who have formed associations for the
purpose of opposing, by moral influence, an institution which they feel
to be inconsistent with the first principles of morals and politics. For
a considerable time before my visit to that part of the country, they
had encountered petty persecutions of almost every conceivable kind.
There is no law in Massachusetts by which the free expression of opinion
on moral subjects is punishable. I heard many regret the absence of such
law. Everything was done that could be done to make up for its absence.
Books on any subject, written by persons who avow by association their
bad opinion of slavery, are not purchased: clergymen are no longer
invited to preach: the proprietors of public rooms will not let them to
members of such associations; and the churches are shut against them.
Their notices of public meetings are torn in the pulpits, while all
notices of other public meetings are read. The newspapers pour contempt
and wrath upon them in one continued stream. Bad practices are imputed
to them, and their denial is drowned in clamour. As a single instance of
this last; I was told so universally in the south and west that the
abolitionists of Boston and New York were in the habit of sending
incendiary tracts among the slaves, that it never occurred to me to
doubt the fact; though I was struck with surprise at never being able to
find any one who had seen any one who had actually seen one of these
tracts. Nor did it occur to me that as slaves cannot read, verbal
messages would be more to the purpose of all parties, as being more
effectual and more prudent. Mr. Madison made the charge, so did Mr.
Clay, so did Mr. Calhoun, so did every slave-holder and merchant with
whom I conversed. I chose afterwards to hear the other side of the whole
question; and I found, to my amazement, that this charge was wholly
groundless. No Abolition Society of New York or Massachusetts has ever
sent any anti-slavery paper south of Washington, except the circulars,
addressed to public officers in the States, which were burnt at
Charleston. The abolitionists of Boston have been denying this charge
ever since it was first made, and offering evidence of its
groundlessness; yet the calumny is persisted in, and, no doubt, honestly
believed, to this hour, throughout the south, whither the voice of the
condemned, stifled by their fellow-citizens, cannot reach.

Only mortal things, however, can be really suffocated; and there has
never yet been an instance of a murder of opinion. There seemed, in
1835, so much danger of the abolitionists making themselves heard, that
an emphatic contradiction was got up, it was hoped in good time.

The abolitionists had been, they believe illegally, denied by the city
authority the use of Faneuil Hall; (called, in memory of revolutionary
days, the "Cradle of Liberty.") Certain merchants and lawyers of Boston
held a meeting there, in August, 1835, for the purpose of reprobating
the meetings of the abolitionists, and denouncing their measures, while
approving of their principles. The less that is said of this
meeting,--the deepest of all the disgraces of Boston,--the better. It
bears its character in its face. Its avowed object was to put down the
expression of opinion by opprobrium, in the absence of gag laws. Of the
fifteen hundred who signed the requisition for this meeting, there are
many, especially among the younger and more thoughtless, who have long
repented of the deed. Some signed in anger; some in fear; many in
mistake; and of each of these there are some, who would fain, if it were
possible, efface their signatures with their blood.

It is an invariable fact, and recognized as such, that meetings held to
supply the deficiency of gag laws are the prelude to the violence which
supplies the deficiency of executioners under such laws. Every meeting
held to denounce opinion is followed by a mob. This was so well
understood in the present case that the abolitionists were warned that
if they met again publicly, they would be answerable for the disorders
that might ensue. The abolitionists pleaded that this was like making
the rich man answerable for the crime of the thief who robbed him, on
the ground that if the honest man had not been rich, the thief would not
have been tempted to rob him. The abolitionists also perceived how
liberty of opinion and of speech depended on their conduct in this
crisis; and they resolved to yield to no threats of illegal violence;
but to hold their legal meeting, pursuant to advertisement, for the
despatch of their usual business. One remarkable feature of the case was
that this heavy responsibility rested upon women. It was a ladies'
meeting that was in question. Upon consultation, the ladies agreed that
they should never have sought the perilous duty of defending liberty of
opinion and speech at the last crisis; but, as such a service seemed
manifestly appointed to them, the women were ready.

On the 21st of October, they met, pursuant to advertisement, at the
office of their association, No. 46, Washington Street. Twenty-five
reached their room, by going three-quarters of an hour before the
appointed time. Five more made their way up with difficulty through the
crowd. A hundred more were turned back by the mob.

They knew that a hand-bill had been circulated on the Exchange, and
posted on the City Hall, and throughout the city, the day before, which
declared that Thompson, the abolitionist, was to address them; and
invited the citizens, under promise of pecuniary reward, to "snake
Thompson out, and bring him to the tar-kettle before dark." The ladies
had been warned that they would be killed, "as sure as fate," if they
showed themselves on their own premises that day. They therefore
informed the mayor that they expected to be attacked. The reply of the
city marshal was, "You give us a great deal of trouble."

The committee-room was surrounded, and gazed into by a howling,
shrieking mob of gentlemen, while the twenty-five ladies sat perfectly
still, awaiting the striking of the clock. When it struck, they opened
their meeting. They were questioned as to whether Thompson was there in
disguise; to which they made no reply.

They began, as usual, with prayer; the mob shouting "Hurra! here comes
Judge Lynch!" Before they had done, the partition gave way, and the
gentlemen hurled missiles at the lady who was presiding. The secretary
having risen, and begun to read her report, rendered inaudible by the
uproar, the mayor entered, and insisted upon their going home, to save
their lives. The purpose of their meeting was answered: they had
asserted their principle; and they now passed out, two and two, amidst
the execration of some thousands of gentlemen;--persons who had silver
shrines to protect. The ladies, to the number of fifty, walked to the
house of one of their members, and were presently struck to the heart by
the news that Garrison was in the hands of the mob. Garrison is the
chief apostle of abolition in the United States. He had escorted his
wife to the meeting; and, after offering to address the ladies, and
being refused, out of regard to his safety, had left the room, and, as
they supposed, the premises. He was, however, in the house when the
ladies left it. He was hunted for by the mob; dragged from behind some
planks where he had taken refuge, and conveyed into the street. Here his
hat was trampled under-foot, and brick-bats were aimed at his bare head;
a rope was tied round him, and thus he was dragged through the streets.
His young wife saw all this. Her exclamation was, "I think my husband
will be true to his principles. I am sure my husband will not deny his
principles." Her confidence was just. Garrison never denies his
principles.

He was saved by a stout truckman, who, with his bludgeon, made his way
into the crowd, as if to attack the victim. He protected the bare head,
and pushed on towards a station house, whence the mayor's officers
issued, and pulled in Garrison, who was afterwards put into a coach. The
mob tried to upset the coach, and throw down the horses; but the driver
laid about him with his whip, and the constables with their staves, and
Garrison was safely lodged in jail: for protection; for he had committed
no offence.

Before the mayor ascended the stairs to dismiss the ladies, he had done
a very remarkable deed;--he had given permission to two gentlemen to
pull down and destroy the anti-slavery sign, bearing the inscription,
"Anti-Slavery Office,"--which had hung for two years, as signs do hang
before public offices in Boston. The plea of the mayor is, that he hoped
the rage of the mob would thus be appeased: that is, he gave them leave
to break the laws in one way, lest they should in another. The citizens
followed up this deed of the mayor with one no less remarkable. They
elected these two rioters members of the State legislature, by a large
majority, within ten days.

I passed through the mob some time after it had begun to assemble. I
asked my fellow-passengers in the stage what it meant. They supposed it
was a busy foreign-post day, and that this occasioned an assemblage of
gentlemen about the post-office. They pointed out to me that there were
none but gentlemen. We were passing through from Salem, fifteen miles
north of Boston, to Providence, Rhode Island; and were therefore
uninformed of the events and expectations of the day. On the morrow, a
visitor who arrived at Providence from Boston told us the story; and I
had thenceforth an excellent opportunity of hearing all the remarks that
could be made by persons of all ways of thinking and feeling, on this
affair.

It excited much less attention than it deserved; less than would be
believed possible by those at a distance who think more seriously of
persecution for opinion, and less tenderly of slavery than a great many
of the citizens of Boston. To many in the city of Boston the story I
have told would be news: and to yet more in the country, who know that
some trouble was caused by abolition meetings in the city, but who are
not aware that their own will, embodied in the laws, was overborne to
gratify the mercenary interests of a few, and the political fears of a
few more.

The first person with whom I conversed about this riot was the president
of a university. We were perfectly agreed as to the causes and character
of the outrage. This gentleman went over to Boston for a day or two; and
when he returned, I saw him again. He said he was happy to tell me that
we had been needlessly making ourselves uneasy about the affair: that
there had been no mob, the persons assembled having been all gentlemen.

An eminent lawyer at Boston was one of the next to speak upon it. "O,
there was no mob," said he. "I was there myself, and saw they were all
gentlemen. They were all in fine broad-cloth."

"Not the less a mob for that," said I.

"Why, they protected Garrison. He received no harm. They protected
Garrison."

"From whom, or what?"

"O, they would not really hurt him. They only wanted to show that they
would not have such a person live among them."

"Why should not he live among them? Is he guilty under any law?"

"He is an insufferable person to them."

"So may you be to-morrow. If you can catch Garrison breaking the laws,
punish him under the laws. If you cannot, he has as much right to live
where he pleases as you."

Two law pupils of this gentleman presently entered. One approved of all
that had been done, and praised the spirit of the gentlemen of Boston. I
asked whether they had not broken the law. Yes. I asked him if he knew
what the law was. Yes; but it could not be always kept. If a man was
caught in a house setting it on fire, the owner might shoot him; and
Garrison was such an incendiary. I asked him for proof. He had nothing
but hearsay to give. The case, as I told him, came to this. A. says
Garrison is an incendiary. B. says he is not. A. proceeds on his own
opinion to break the law, lest Garrison should do so.

The other pupil told me of the sorrow of heart with which he saw the
law, the life of the republic, set at naught by those who should best
understand its nature and value. He saw that the time was come for the
true men of the republic to oppose a bold front to the insolence of the
rich and the powerful, who were bearing down the liberties of the people
for a matter of opinion. The young men, he saw, must brace themselves up
against the tyranny of the monied mob, and defend the law; or the
liberties of the country were gone. I afterwards found many such among
the young men of the wealthier classes. If they keep their convictions,
they and their city are safe.

No prosecutions followed. I asked a lawyer, an abolitionist, why. He
said there would be difficulty in getting a verdict; and, if it was
obtained, the punishment would be merely a fine, which would be paid on
the spot, and the triumph would remain with the aggressors. This seemed
to me no good reason.

I asked an eminent judge the same question; and whether there was not a
public prosecutor who might prosecute for breach of the peace, if the
abolitionists would not, for the assault on Garrison. He said it might
be done; but he had given his advice against it. Why? The feeling was so
strong against the abolitionists,--the rioters were so respectable in
the city,--it was better to let the whole affair pass over without
notice.

Of others, some knew nothing of it, because it was about such a low set
of people; some could not take any interest in what they were tired of
hearing about; some had not heard anything of the matter; some thought
the abolitionists were served quite right; some were sure the gentlemen
of Boston would not do anything improper; and some owned that there was
such bad taste and meddlesomeness in the abolitionists, that people of
taste kept out of the way of hearing anything about them.

Notwithstanding all this, the body of the people are sound. Many of the
young lawyers are resolved to keep on the watch, to maintain the rights
of the abolitionists in the legislature, and in the streets of the city.
Many hundreds of the working men agreed to leave their work on the first
rumour of riot, get sworn in as special constables, and keep the peace
against the gentry; acting vigorously against the mob ringleaders, if
such should be the magistrates of Boston themselves. I visited many of
the villages in Massachusetts; and there everything seemed right. The
country people are abolitionists, by nature and education, and they see
the iniquity of mob-law. A sagacious gentleman told me that it did him
good to hear, in New York, of this mob, because it proved the rest of
Massachusetts to be in a sound state. It is always 'Boston _versus_
Massachusetts;' and when the city, or the aristocracy there, who think
themselves the city, are very vehemently wrong, it is a plain proof that
the country people are eminently right. This may, for the humour of the
thing, be strongly put; but there is much truth in it.

The philosophy of the case is very easy to understand; and supremely
important to be understood.

The law, in a republic, is the embodiment of the will of the people. As
long as the republic is in a natural and healthy state, containing no
anomaly, and exhibiting no gross vices, the function of the law works
easily, and is understood and reverenced. Its punishments bear only upon
individuals, who have the opposition of society to contend with for
violating its will, and who are helpless against the righteous
visitations of the law.

If there be any anomaly among the institutions of a republic, the
function of the law is certain to be disturbed, sooner or later: and
that disturbance is usually the symptom by the exhibition of which the
anomaly is first detected, and then cured. It was so with free-masonry.
It will be so with slavery; and with every institution inconsistent with
the fundamental principles of democracy. The process is easily
traceable. The worldly interests of the minority,--of perhaps a single
class,--are bound up with the anomaly:--of the minority, because, if the
majority had been interested in any anti-republican institution, the
republic would not have existed. The minority may go on for a length of
time in apparent harmony with the expressed will of the many,--the law.
But the time comes when their anomaly clashes with the law. For
instance, the merchants of the north trade in products which are, as
they believe, created out of a denial that all men are born free and
equal, and that the just powers of rulers are derived from the consent
of the governed; while the contrary principles are the root which
produces the law. Which is to be given up, when both cannot be held? If
the pecuniary interest of merchants is incompatible with freedom of
speech in fellow-citizens, which is to suffer?--The will of the
majority, the lawmaker, is to decide. But it takes some time to awaken
the will of the majority; and till it awakes, the interest of the
faction is active, and overbears the law. The retribution is certain;
the result is safe. But the evils meanwhile are so tremendous, that no
exertion should be spared to open the eyes of the majority to the
insults offered to its will. There is no fear that the majority will
ultimately succumb to the minority,--the harmonious law to the
discordant anomaly: but it is a fearful thing, meantime, that the brave
should be oppressed by the mercenary, and oppressed in proportion to
their bravery; that the masters of black slaves in the south should be
allowed to make white slaves in the north; that power and wealth should
be used to blind the people to the nature and dignity of the law, and to
seduce them into a preference of brute force. These evils are so
tremendous as to make it the duty of every citizen to bring every
lawbreaker, high or low, to punishment; to strike out of the election
list every man who tampers with the will of the majority; to teach every
child what the law is, and why it must be maintained; to keep his eye on
the rostrum, the bench, the bar, the pulpit, the press, the lyceum, the
school, that no fallacy, no compromise with an anomaly, no surrender of
principle be allowed to pass unexposed and unstigmatized.

One compound fallacy is allowed daily to pass unexposed and
unstigmatized. "You make no allowance," said a friend who was strangely
bewildered by it,--"you make no allowance for the great number of
excellent people who view the anomaly and the law as you do, but who
keep quiet, because they sincerely believe that by speaking and acting
they should endanger the Union." This explains the conduct of a crowd of
"excellent people," neither merchants, nor the friends of slave-holders,
nor approving slavery, or mobbing, or persecution for opinion; but who
revile or satirize the abolitionists, and, for the rest, hold their
tongues. But is it possible that such do not see that if slavery be
wrong, and if it be indeed bound up with the Union, the Union must fall?
Is it possible that they do not see that if the question be really
this,--that if the laws of God and the arrangements of man are
incompatible, man's arrangements must give way?--I regard it as a false
and mischievous assumption that slavery is bound up with the Union: but
if I believed the dictum, I should not be for "putting off the evil
day." Every day which passes over the unredressed wrongs of any class
which a republic holds in her bosom; every day which brings persecution
on those who act out the principles which all profess; every day which
adds a sanction to brute force, and impairs the sacredness of law; every
day which prolongs impunity to the oppressor and discouragement to the
oppressed, is a more evil day than that which should usher in the work
of renovation.

But the dictum is not true. This bitter satire upon the constitution,
and upon all who have complacently lived under it, is not true. The
Union is not incompatible with freedom of speech. The Union does not
forbid men to act according to their convictions. The Union has never
depended for its existence on hypocrisy, insult, and injury; and it
never will.

Let citizens but take heed individually to respect the law, and see that
others do,--that no neighbour transgresses it, that no statesman
despises it unrebuked, that no child grows up ignorant or careless of
it; and the Union is as secure as the ground they tread upon. If this be
not done, everything is in peril, for the season; not only the Union,
but property, home, life and integrity.


SECTION V.

SECTIONAL PREJUDICE.

It is the practice at Washington to pay the Members of Congress, not
only a per diem allowance, but their travelling expenses; at so much per
twenty miles. Two Members of Congress from Missouri made charges widely
different in amount. Complaints were made that the Members were not
confined to a mail route, and that the country had to pay for any
digressions the honourable gentlemen might be in the humour to make.
Upon this, a Member observed that, so far from wishing to confine the
congressional travellers to a mail route, he would, if possible,
prescribe the condition that they should travel, both in coming and
going, through every State of the Union. Any money thus expended, would
be, he considered, a cheap price to pay for the conquest of prejudices
and dispersion of unfriendly feelings, which would be the consequence of
the rambles he proposed.

The Members of Congress from the north like to revert to the day when
there were only two universities, Harvard and Yale, to which all the
youth of the Union repaired for education. The southern members love to
boast of the increase of colleges, so that every State will soon be
educating its own youth. The northern men miss the sweet sounds of
acknowledgment which used to meet their ears, as often as past days were
referred to--the grateful mention of the New England retreats where the
years of preparation for active life were spent. The southern men are
mortified at the supposition that everything intellectual must come out
of New England. When they boast that Virginia has produced almost all
their Presidents, they are met by the boast that New England has
furnished almost all the school-masters, professors, and clergy of the
country. While the north is still fostering a reverence for the Union,
the south loses no opportunity of enlarging lovingly on the virtue of
passionate attachment to one's native state.

There is much nature and much reason in all this. It is true that there
is advantage in the youth of the whole country being brought together
within college walls, at the age when warm friendships are formed. They
can hardly quarrel very desperately in Congress, after having striven,
and loved, and learned together, in their bright early days. The cadets
at West Point spoke warmly to me of this. They told me that when a youth
is coming from afar, the youths who have arrived from an opposite point
of the compass prepare to look cold upon him and quiz him, and receive
him frigidly enough; but the second Sunday seldom comes round before
they wonder at him and themselves, and acknowledge that he might almost
have been born in their own State. On the other hand, it is true that it
would be an absurdity and a hardship to the dwellers in the south and
west to have no means of educating their youth at home; but to be
obliged to send them a thousand miles in pursuit of necessary learning.
It is also true that medical colleges should abound; that peculiar
diseases, incident to climate and locality, may be studied on the spot.
In this, as in many other cases, some good must be sacrificed for the
attainment of a greater good.

The question is, need sectional prejudices increase under the new
arrangements? Are there no means of counteracting this great evil,
except the ancient methods? Is West Point the last spot whereon common
interests may rally, and whence state jealousies may be excluded?

I should be sorry if the answer were unfavourable; for this Sectional
Prejudice, carried beyond the point of due political vigilance, is
folly,--childish folly. Events prove it to be so. Deadly political
enemies meet at Washington, and snarl and declaim at one another with
mighty fierceness. They find themselves, some sunny day, lying on the
grass under the shade of a tree, at the country-house of an
acquaintance; they rise up cordial friends. They have actually discussed
the question of questions, the American System and Nullification; and
yet they rise up cordial friends. Again; a Boston gentleman and his lady
travel for health through the south and west. They hear abuse of their
State and city in abundance by the roadside; but their hearts are
touched by the hospitality and friendliness they meet under every roof.
Again; the planter carries his family to a Rhode Island bathing place,
for the hot season: and there he finds some to whom he can open his
heart about his domestic troubles, caused by slavery; he gains their
sympathy, and carries away their esteem. The sectional hatred, if not an
abstraction, is founded mainly on abstractions, and gives way at once
when the parties are confronted. Does it not deserve to be called
childish folly?

Yet "hatred" is not too strong a term for this sectional prejudice. Many
a time in America have I been conscious of that pang and shudder which
are felt only in the presence of hatred. I question whether the enmity
between the British and the Americans, at the most exasperating crisis
of the war, could ever have been more intense than some that I have seen
flashing in the eyes, and heard from the lips, of Americans against
fellow-citizens in distant sections of their country. I have scarcely
known whether to laugh or to mourn when I have been told that the New
England people are all pedlars or canting priests; that the people of
the south are all heathens; and those of the west all barbarians. Nay, I
was even told in New York that the Rhode Island people were all
heathens, and the New Jersey folks no better. Some Baltimore ladies told
me that the Philadelphia ladies say that no Baltimore lady knows how to
put on a bonnet: but that the Philadelphians have something worse the
matter with them than that; for that they do not know how to be
hospitable to strangers. Without stopping to settle which is the gravest
of these heavy charges, I am anxious to bear my testimony against the
correctness of either. I saw some pretty bonnets, most becomingly worn,
at Baltimore; and I can speak confidently to the hospitality of
Philadelphia.

Trifling as some instances appear of the manifestation of this puerile
spirit, it sometimes, it always, issues in results which are no
trifle;--always, because the spirit of jealousy is a deadly curse to him
who is possessed by it, whether it be founded on fact, or no. It cannot
co-exist with a generous patriotism, one essential requisite of which is
an enlarged faith in fellow-citizens. All republicans are patriotic,
more or less frequently and loftily. If every American will look into
himself at the moment he is glowing with patriotism, he will find his
sectional prejudices melted away and gone, for the season. The Americans
feel this in their travels abroad, when their country is attacked. They
yearn towards the remotest dwellers in their country as if they were the
nearest and dearest. Would they could always feel thus at home, and in
the absence of provocation!

The most mortifying instance that I witnessed of this sectional
prejudice was at Cincinnati. It was the most mortifying, on two
accounts; because it did not give way before intercourse; and because
its consequences are likely to be very serious to the city, and, if it
spreads, to the whole west. One may laugh at the untravelled citizen of
the south who declares that he knows the New Englanders very well. "How
should you know the New Englanders?" "O, they drive about in our parts
sometimes:"--"they" meaning the Yankee pedlars with wooden clocks for
sale. One may laugh at the simple youth on board a steam-boat on Lake
Erie, who warned me not to believe anything the Huron people might tell
me against the Sandusky people, because he could tell me beforehand that
it was all false, and that the Sandusky people are far better than the
Huron people. One may laugh at the contemptuous amazement of the Boston
lady at my declaration that I liked Cincinnati; that wild western place,
where she believed people did not sit down to dinner like Christians.
All mistakes of this kind, it is clear, might be rectified by a little
travelling. But it is a serious matter to see the travelled gentlemen,
the professional men of such a place as Cincinnati, setting up their
sectional prejudices in one another's way.

Cincinnati is a glorious place. Few things can be conceived finer than
the situation of this magnificent city, and the beauty by which she is
surrounded. She is enthroned upon a high platform,--one of the rich
bottoms occurring on the Ohio, which expand the traveller's notions of
what fertility is. Behind her are hills, opening and closing, receding
and advancing; here glowing with the richest green pasturage, and there
crested and ribbed by beeches which seem transplanted from some giant
land. Wherever we went among these hills, we found them rounding away
from us in some new form of beauty; in steep grassy slopes, with a
running stream at the bottom; in shadowy precipices, bristling with
trees; in quiet recesses, pierced by sunset lights, shining in among the
beechen stems, which spring, unencumbered by undergrowth, from the rich
elastic turf. These hill-sides reminded me of the Castle of Indolence,
of the quiet paths of Eden, of the shades that Una trod, of Windsor
Forest,--of all that my memory carried about undulating wood-lands: but
nothing would do; no description that I am acquainted with is rich
enough to answer to what I saw on the Ohio,--its slopes, and clumps, and
groves. At the foot of these hills runs the river, broad and full, busy
with the commerce of the wide West. A dozen steam-boats lie abreast at
the wharf, and many more are constantly passing; some stealing along,
unheard so far off, under the opposite bank; others puffing and
ploughing along the middle of the stream. Fine, level turnpike-roads
branch off from the city among the hills, which open so as to allow a
free circulation of air over the entire platform. Cincinnati is the most
healthy large city in the United States. The streets are wide; and the
terraces afford fine situations for houses. The furnishing of the
dwellings is as magnificent as the owners may choose to make it; for
commerce with the whole world is carried on from their port. Their
vineyards, their conservatories, their fruit and flower gardens delight
the eye in the gorgeous month of June. They have a native artist of
great genius who has adorned the walls of their houses with, perhaps,
the best pictures I saw in the country. I saw their streets filled with
their thousands of free-school children. "These," said a lady to me,
"are our populace." I thought it a populace worthy of such a city. There
is no need to speak of its long ranges of furnaces, of its shipping, of
its incredible commerce in pork, of its wealth and prospects. Suffice it
that one of its most respected inhabitants tells that when he landed in
Ohio, less than fifty years ago, it contained fewer than a hundred
whites; and buffalo lodged in a cane brake where the city now stands;
while the State at present contains upwards of a million of inhabitants,
the city between thirty and forty thousand; and Cincinnati has four
daily, and five or six weekly, newspapers, besides a variety of other
periodicals.

The most remarkable circumstance, and the most favourable, with regard
to the peopling of Cincinnati is, that its population contains
contributions of almost every element that goes to constitute society;
and each in its utmost vigour. There are here few of the arbitrary
associations which exist among the members of other societies. Young men
come with their wives, in all directions, from afar; with no parents,
cousins, sects, or parties about them. Here is an assemblage from almost
every nation under heaven,--a contribution from the resources of almost
every country; and all unburdened, and ready for natural association and
vigorous action. Like takes to like, and friendships are formed from
congeniality, and not from accident or worldly design. Yet is there a
tempering of prejudices, a mutual enlightenment, from previous
differences of education and habits,--difference even of country and
language. Great force is thus given to any principle carried out into
action by the common convictions of differing persons; and life is deep
and rapid in its course. Such is the theory of society in Cincinnati;
and such is, in some degree, its practice. But here it is that sectional
prejudice interferes, to set up arbitrary associations where, of all
places, they should be shunned.

The adventurers who barbarize society in new places, have gone westward;
and, of the full population that remains, above one-fifth are Germans.
Their function seems to be, everywhere in the United States, to
develope the material resources of the infant places in which they
settle; and the intellectual ones at a more advanced stage. They are the
farmers and market-gardeners here. There are many English, especially
among the artizans. I saw two handsome white houses, on the side of a
hill above the river, with rich ground lots, and extensive garden walls.
These are the property of two English artizans, brothers, who emigrated
a very few years ago. An Englishman, servant to a physician in
Cincinnati in 1818, turned pork-butcher; was worth 10,000 dollars when I
was there, and is rapidly growing rich. There are many New Englanders
among the clergy, lawyers, and merchants; and this is the portion of
society that will not freely mix with the westerners. It is no wonder if
the earliest settlers of the place, westerners, are proud of it, and are
careful to cherish its primitive emblems and customs. The New Englanders
should not take this as an affront to themselves. It is also natural
enough that the New Englanders should think and speak alike, and be fond
of acting together; and the westerners should not complain of their
being clannish. I was at a delightful party at the house of one of the
oldest inhabitants, where a sprig of the distinctive buck-eye was hung
up in the hall, and a buck-eye bowl of lemonade stood on the table. This
was peevishly commented upon by some of eastern derivation: but I
thought it would have been wiser to adopt the emblem than to find fault
with it. Cincinnati has not gone to the eastern people: the eastern
people have gone to her. If they have adopted her for their city, they
may as well adopt her emblems too, and make themselves westerners at
heart, as well as in presence. These discontents may appear trifling;
but they are not so while they impede the furtherance of great objects.
I was told on the spot that they would be very transient; but I fear it
is not so. And yet they would be very transient if the spirited and
choice inhabitants of that magnificent city could see their position as
it is viewed by people at a distance. When I was one day expressing my
admiration, and saying that it was a place for people of ambition,
worldly or philanthropic, to live in, one of its noblest citizens said,
"Yes, we have a new creation going on here; won't you come and dabble in
the mud?" If they will but remember that it is a new creation that is
going on, and not a fortuitous concourse of atoms; that the human will
is, or may be, the presiding intelligence; that centuries hence, their
posterity will either bless their memories with homage like that which
is paid to the Pilgrim Fathers, or suffer the retribution which follows
the indulgence of human passions, all petty jealousies will surely
subside, in the prospect which lies before every good man. In a place
like Cincinnati, where every man may gratify his virtuous will, and do,
with his own hands, the deeds of a generation, feelings should be as
grand as the occasion. If the merchants of Genoa were princes, the
citizens of Cincinnati, as of every first city of a new region, are
princes and prophets at once. They can foresee the future, if they
please; and shape it, if they will: and petty personal regards are
unworthy of such a destiny. It is melancholy to see how the crusading
chiefs quarrelled for precedence on the soil of the Holy Land: it would
be more so to see the leaders of this new enterprise desecrating their
higher mission by a like contention.


SECTION VI.

CITIZENSHIP OF PEOPLE OF COLOUR.

Before I entered New England, while I was ascending the Mississippi, I
was told by a Boston gentleman that the people of colour in the New
England States were perfectly well-treated; that the children were
educated in schools provided for them; and that their fathers freely
exercised the franchise. This gentleman certainly believed he was
telling me the truth. That he, a busy citizen of Boston, should know no
better, is now as striking an exemplification of the state of the case
to me as a correct representation of the facts would have been. There
are two causes for his mistake. He was not aware that the schools for
the coloured children in New England are, unless they escape by their
insignificance, shut up, or pulled down, or the school-house wheeled
away upon rollers over the frontier of a pious State, which will not
endure that its coloured citizens should be educated. He was not aware
of a gentleman of colour, and his family, being locked out of their own
hired pew in a church, because their white brethren will not Worship by
their side. But I will not proceed with an enumeration of injuries, too
familiar to Americans to excite any feeling but that of weariness; and
too disgusting to all others to be endured. The other cause of this
gentleman's mistake was, that he did not, from long custom, feel some
things to be injuries, which he would call anything but good treatment,
if he had to bear them himself. Would he think it good treatment to be
forbidden to eat with fellow-citizens; to be assigned to a particular
gallery in his church; to be excluded from college, from municipal
office, from professions, from scientific and literary associations? If
he felt himself excluded from every department of society, but its
humiliations and its drudgery, would he declare himself to be "perfectly
well-treated in Boston?" Not a word more of statement is needed.

A Connecticut judge lately declared on the bench that he believed people
of colour were not considered citizens in the laws. He was proved to be
wrong. He was actually ignorant of the wording of the acts by which
people of colour are termed citizens. Of course, no judge could have
forgotten this who had seen them treated as citizens: nor could one of
the most eminent statesmen and lawyers in the country have told me that
it is still a doubt, in the minds of some high authorities, whether
people of colour are citizens. He is as mistaken as the judge. There has
been no such doubt since the Connecticut judge was corrected and
enlightened. The error of the statesman arose from the same cause; he
had never seen the coloured people treated as citizens. "In fact," said
he, "these people hold an anomalous situation. They are protected as
citizens when the public service requires their security; but not
otherwise treated as such," Any comment would weaken this intrepid
statement.

The common argument, about the inferiority of the coloured race, bears
no relation whatever to this question. They are citizens. They stand, as
such, in the law, and in the acknowledgment of every one who knows the
law. They are citizens, yet their houses and schools are pulled down,
and they can obtain no remedy at law. They are thrust out of offices,
and excluded from the most honourable employments, and stripped of all
the best benefits of society by fellow-citizens who, once a year,
solemnly lay their hands on their hearts, and declare that all men are
born free and equal, and that rulers derive their just powers from the
consent of the governed.

This system of injury is not wearing out. Lafayette, on his last visit
to the United States, expressed his astonishment at the increase of the
prejudice against colour. He remembered, he said, how the black soldiers
used to mess with the whites in the revolutionary war. The leaders of
that war are gone where principles are all,--where prejudices are
nothing. If their ghosts could arise, in majestic array, before the
American nation, on their great anniversary, and hold up before them the
mirror of their constitution, in the light of its first principles,
where would the people hide themselves from the blasting radiance? They
would call upon their holy soil to swallow them up, as unworthy to tread
upon it. But not all. It should ever be remembered that America is the
country of the best friends the coloured race has ever had. The more
truth there is in the assertions of the oppressors of the blacks, the
more heroism there is in their friends. The greater the excuse for the
pharisees of the community, the more divine is the equity of the
redeemers of the coloured race. If it be granted that the coloured race
are naturally inferior, naturally depraved, disgusting, cursed,--it must
be granted that it is a heavenly charity which descends among them to
give such solace as it can to their incomprehensible existence. As long
as the excuses of the one party go to enhance the merit of the other,
the society is not to be despaired of, even with this poisonous anomaly
at its heart.

Happily, however, the coloured race is not cursed by God, as it is by
some factions of his children. The less clear-sighted of them are
pardonable for so believing. Circumstances, for which no living man is
answerable, have generated an erroneous conviction in the feeble mind of
man, which sees not beyond the actual and immediate. No remedy could
ever have been applied, unless stronger minds than ordinary had been
brought into the case. But it so happens, wherever there is an anomaly,
giant minds rise up to overthrow it: minds gigantic, not in
understanding, but in faith. Wherever they arise, they are the salt of
their earth, and its corruption is retrieved. So it is now in America.
While the mass of common men and women are despising, and disliking, and
fearing, and keeping down the coloured race, blinking the fact that they
are citizens, the few of Nature's aristocracy are putting forth a strong
hand to lift up this degraded race out of oppression, and their country
from the reproach of it. If they were but one or two, trembling and
toiling in solitary energy, the world afar would be confident of their
success. But they number hundreds and thousands; and if ever they feel a
passing doubt of their progress, it is only because they are pressed
upon by the meaner multitude. Over the sea, no one doubts of their
victory. It is as certain as that the risen sun will reach the meridian.
Already are there overflowing colleges, where no distinction of colour
is allowed;--overflowing, _because_ no distinction of colour is allowed.
Already have people of colour crossed the thresholds of many whites, as
guests, not as drudges or beggars. Already are they admitted to worship,
and to exercise charity, among the whites.

The world has heard and seen enough of the reproach incurred by America,
on account of her coloured population. It is now time to look for the
fairer side The crescent streak is brightening towards the full, to wane
no more. Already is the world beyond the sea beginning to think of
America, less as the country of the double-faced pretender to the name
of Liberty, than as the home of the single-hearted, clear-eyed Presence
which, under the name of Abolitionism, is majestically passing through
the land which is soon to be her throne.


SECTION VII.

POLITICAL NON-EXISTENCE OF WOMEN.

One of the fundamental principles announced in the Declaration of
Independence is, that governments derive their just powers from the
consent of the governed. How can the political condition of women be
reconciled with this?

Governments in the United States have power to tax women who hold
property; to divorce them from their husbands; to fine, imprison, and
execute them for certain offences. Whence do these governments derive
their powers? They are not "just," as they are not derived from the
consent of the women thus governed.

Governments in the United States have power to enslave certain women;
and also to punish other women for inhuman treatment of such slaves.
Neither of these powers are "just;" not being derived from the consent
of the governed.

Governments decree to women in some States half their husbands'
property; in others one-third. In some, a woman, on her marriage, is
made to yield all her property to her husband; in others, to retain a
portion, or the whole, in her own hands. Whence do governments derive
the unjust power of thus disposing of property without the consent of
the governed?

The democratic principle condemns all this as wrong; and requires the
equal political representation of all rational beings. Children, idiots,
and criminals, during the season of sequestration, are the only fair
exceptions.

The case is so plain that I might close it here; but it is interesting
to inquire how so obvious a decision has been so evaded as to leave to
women no political rights whatever. The question has been asked, from
time to time, in more countries than one, how obedience to the laws can
be required of women, when no woman has, either actually or virtually,
given any assent to any law. No plausible answer has, as far as I can
discover, been offered; for the good reason, that no plausible answer
can be devised. The most principled democratic writers on government
have on this subject sunk into fallacies, as disgraceful as any advocate
of despotism has adduced. In fact, they have thus sunk from being, for
the moment, advocates of despotism. Jefferson in America, and James Mill
at home, subside, for the occasion, to the level of the author of the
Emperor of Russia's Catechism for the young Poles.

Jefferson says,[7] "Were our State a pure democracy, in which all the
inhabitants should meet together to transact all their business, there
would yet be excluded from their deliberations,

"1. Infants, until arrived at years of discretion;

"2. Women, who, to prevent depravation of morals, and ambiguity of
issue, could not mix promiscuously in the public meetings of men;

"3. Slaves, from whom the unfortunate state of things with us takes away
the rights of will and of property."

If the slave disqualification, here assigned, were shifted up under the
head of Women, their case would be nearer the truth than as it now
stands. Woman's lack of will and of property, is more like the true
cause of her exclusion from the representation, than that which is
actually set down against her. As if there could be no means of
conducting public affairs but by promiscuous meetings! As if there would
be more danger in promiscuous meetings for political business than in
such meetings for worship, for oratory, for music, for dramatic
entertainments,--for any of the thousand transactions of civilized life!
The plea is not worth another word.

Mill says, with regard to representation, in his Essay on Government,
"One thing is pretty clear; that all those individuals, whose interests
are involved in those of other individuals, may be struck off without
inconvenience.... In this light, women may be regarded, the interest of
almost all of whom is involved, either in that of their fathers or in
that of their husbands."

The true democratic principle is, that no person's interests can be, or
can be ascertained to be, identical with those of any other person. This
allows the exclusion of none but incapables.

The word "almost," in Mr. Mill's second sentence, rescues women from the
exclusion he proposes. As long as there are women who have neither
husbands nor fathers, his proposition remains an absurdity.

The interests of women who have fathers and husbands can never be
identical with theirs, while there is a necessity for laws to protect
women against their husbands and fathers. This statement is not worth
another word.

Some who desire that there should be an equality of property between men
and women, oppose representation, on the ground that political duties
would be incompatible with the other duties which women have to
discharge. The reply to this is, that women are the best judges here.
God has given time and power for the discharge of all duties; and, if he
had not, it would be for women to decide which they would take, and
which they would leave. But their guardians follow the ancient fashion
of deciding what is best for their wards. The Emperor of Russia
discovers when a coat of arms and title do not agree with a subject
prince. The King of France early perceives that the air of Paris does
not agree with a free-thinking foreigner. The English Tories feel the
hardship that it would be to impose the franchise on every artizan, busy
as he is in getting his bread. The Georgian planter perceives the
hardship that freedom would be to his slaves. And the best friends of
half the human race peremptorily decide for them as to their rights,
their duties, their feelings, their powers. In all these cases, the
persons thus cared for feel that the abstract decision rests with
themselves; that, though they may be compelled to submit, they need not
acquiesce.

It is pleaded that half of the human race does acquiesce in the decision
of the other half, as to their rights and duties. And some instances,
not only of submission, but of acquiescence, there are. Forty years ago,
the women of New Jersey went to the poll, and voted, at state elections.
The general term, "inhabitants," stood unqualified;--as it will again,
when the true democratic principle comes to be fully understood. A
motion was made to correct the inadvertence; and it was done, as a
matter of course; without any appeal, as far as I could learn, from the
persons about to be injured. Such acquiescence proves nothing but the
degradation of the injured party. It inspires the same emotions of pity
as the supplication of the freed slave who kneels to his master to
restore him to slavery, that he may have his animal wants supplied,
without being troubled with human rights and duties. Acquiescence like
this is an argument which cuts the wrong way for those who use it.

But this acquiescence is only partial; and, to give any semblance of
strength to the plea, the acquiescence must be complete. I, for one, do
not acquiesce. I declare that whatever obedience I yield to the laws of
the society in which I live is a matter between, not the community and
myself, but my judgment and my will. Any punishment inflicted on me for
the breach of the laws, I should regard as so much gratuitous injury:
for to those laws I have never, actually or virtually, assented. I know
that there are women in England who agree with me in this--I know that
there are women in America who agree with me in this. The plea of
acquiescence is invalidated by us.

It is pleaded that, by enjoying the protection of some laws, women give
their assent to all. This needs but a brief answer. Any protection thus
conferred is, under woman's circumstances, a boon bestowed at the
pleasure of those in whose power she is. A boon of any sort is no
compensation for the privation of something else; nor can the enjoyment
of it bind to the performance of anything to which it bears no relation.
Because I, by favour, may procure the imprisonment of the thief who robs
my house, am I, unrepresented, therefore bound not to smuggle French
ribbons? The obligation not to smuggle has a widely different
derivation.

I cannot enter upon the commonest order of pleas of all;--those which
relate to the virtual influence of woman; her swaying the judgment and
will of man through the heart; and so forth. One might as well try to
dissect the morning mist. I knew a gentleman in America who told me how
much rather he had be a woman than the man he is;--a professional man, a
father, a citizen. He would give up all this for a woman's influence. I
thought he was mated too soon. He should have married a lady, also of my
acquaintance, who would not at all object to being a slave, if ever the
blacks should have the upper hand; "it is so right that the one race
should be subservient to the other!" Or rather,--I thought it a pity
that the one could not be a woman, and the other a slave; so that an
injured individual of each class might be exalted into their places, to
fulfil and enjoy the duties and privileges which they despise, and, in
despising, disgrace.

The truth is, that while there is much said about "the sphere of woman,"
two widely different notions are entertained of what is meant by the
phrase. The narrow, and, to the ruling party, the more convenient notion
is that sphere appointed by men, and bounded by their ideas of
propriety;--a notion from which any and every woman may fairly dissent.
The broad and true conception is of the sphere appointed by God, and
bounded by the powers which he has bestowed. This commands the assent of
man and woman; and only the question of powers remains to be proved.

That woman has power to represent her own interests, no one can deny
till she has been tried. The modes need not be discussed here: they must
vary with circumstances. The fearful and absurd images which are
perpetually called up to perplex the question,--images of women on
wool-sacks in England, and under canopies in America, have nothing to do
with the matter. The principle being once established, the methods will
follow, easily, naturally, and under a remarkable transmutation of the
ludicrous into the sublime. The kings of Europe would have laughed
mightily, two centuries ago, at the idea of a commoner, without robes,
crown, or sceptre, stepping into the throne of a strong nation. Yet who
dared to laugh when Washington's super-royal voice greeted the New World
from the presidential chair, and the old world stood still to catch the
echo?

The principle of the equal rights of both halves of the human race is
all we have to do with here. It is the true democratic principle which
can never be seriously controverted, and only for a short time evaded.
Governments can derive their just powers only from the consent of the
governed.

FOOTNOTE:

[7] Correspondence vol. iv. p. 295.




PART II.

ECONOMY.

     "That thou givest them they gather. Thou openest thine hand; they
     are filled with good."

     _104th Psalm._


The traveller from the Old World to the New is apt to lose himself in
reflection when he should be observing. Speculations come in crowds in
the wilderness. He finds himself philosophizing with every step he
takes, as luxuriously as by his study fireside, or in his rare solitary
walk at home.

In England, everything comes complete and finished under notice. Each
man may be aware of some one process of formation, which it is his
business to conduct; but all else is presented to him in its entireness.
The statesman knows what it is to compose an act of parliament; to
proceed from the first perception of the want of it, through the
gathering together of facts and opinions, the selection from these, the
elaborating, adjusting, moulding, specifying, excluding, consolidating,
till it becomes an entire something, which he throws down for parliament
to find fault with. When it is passed, the rest of society looks upon it
as a whole, as a child does upon a table or a doll, without being aware
of any process of formation. The shoemaker, thus, takes his loaf of
bread, and the clock that ticks behind his door, as if they came down
from the clouds as they are, in return for so much of his wages; and he
analyzes nothing but shoes. The baker and watchmaker receive their shoes
in the same way, and analyze nothing but bread and clocks. Too many
gentlemen and ladies analyze nothing at all. If better taught, and
introduced at an early age into the world of analysis, nothing, in the
whole course of education, is probably so striking to their minds. They
begin a fresh existence from the day when they first obtain a glimpse
into this new region of discovery.

Such an era is the traveller's entrance upon the wilder regions of
America. His old experience is all reversed. He sees nothing of art in
its entireness; but little of nature in her instrumentality. Nature is
there the empress, not the handmaid. Art is her inexperienced page, and
no longer the Prospero to whom she is the Ariel.

It is an absorbing thing to watch the process of world-making:--both the
formation of the natural and the conventional world. I witnessed both in
America; and when I look back upon it now, it seems as if I had been in
another planet. I saw something of the process of creating the natural
globe in the depths of the largest explored cave in the world. In its
depths, in this noiseless workshop, was Nature employed with her blind
and dumb agents, fashioning mysteries which the earthquake of a thousand
years hence may bring to light, to give man a new sense of the shortness
of his life. I saw something of the process of world-making behind the
fall of Niagara, in the thunder cavern, where the rocks that have stood
for ever tremble to their fall amidst the roar of the unexhausted
floods. I stood where soon human foot shall stand no more. Foot-hold
after foot-hold is destined to be thrown down, till, after more ages
than the world has yet known, the last rocky barrier shall be
overpowered, and an ocean shall overspread countries which are but just
entering upon civilized existence. Niagara itself is but one of the
shifting scenes of life, like all of the outward that we hold most
permanent. Niagara itself, like the systems of the sky, is one of the
hands of Nature's clock, moving, though too slowly to be perceived by
the unheeding,--still moving, to mark the lapse of time. Niagara itself
is destined to be as the traditionary monsters of the ancient earth--a
giant existence, to be spoken of to wondering ears in studious hours,
and believed in from the sole evidence of its surviving grandeur and
beauty. While I stood in the wet whirlwind, with the crystal roof above
me, the thundering floor beneath, and the foaming whirlpool and rushing
flood before me, I saw those quiet, studious hours of the future world
when this cataract shall have become a tradition, and the spot on which
I stood shall be the centre of a wide sea, a new region of life. This
was seeing world-making. So it was on the Mississippi, when a sort of
scum on the waters betokened the birth-place of new land. All things
help in this creation. The cliffs of the upper Missouri detach their
soil, and send it thousands of miles down the stream. The river brings
it, and deposits it, in continual increase, till a barrier is raised
against the rushing waters themselves. The air brings seeds, and drops
them where they sprout, and strike downwards, so that their roots bind
the soft soil, and enable it to bear the weight of new accretions. The
infant forest, floating, as it appeared, on the surface of the turbid
and rapid waters, may reveal no beauty to the painter; but to the eye
of one who loves to watch the process of world-making, it is full of
delight. These islands are seen in every stage of growth. The
cotton-wood trees, from being like cresses in a pool, rise breast-high;
then they are like the thickets, to whose shade the alligator may
retreat; then, like groves that bid the sun good-night, while he is
still lighting up the forest; then like the forest itself, with the
wood-cutter's house within its screen, flowers springing about its
stems, and the wild-vine climbing to meet the night breezes on its lofty
canopy. This was seeing world-making. Here was strong instigation to the
exercise of analysis.

One of the most frequent thoughts of a speculator in these wildernesses,
is the rarity of the chance which brings him here to speculate. The
primitive glories of nature have, almost always since the world began,
been dispensed to savages; to men who, dearly as they love the
wilderness, have no power of bringing into contrast with it the mind of
man, as enriched and stimulated by cultivated society. Busy colonists,
pressed by bodily wants, are the next class brought over the threshold
of this temple: and they come for other purposes than to meditate. The
next are those who would make haste to be rich; selfish adventurers, who
drive out the red man, and drive in the black man, and, amidst the
forests and the floods, think only of cotton and of gold. Not to such
alone should the primitive glories of nature be dispensed; glories which
can never be restored. The philosopher should come, before they are
effaced, and find combinations and proportions of life and truth which
are not to be found elsewhere. The painter should come, and find
combinations and proportions of visible beauty which are not to be found
elsewhere. The architect should come, and find suggestions and
irradiations of his art which are not to be found elsewhere. The poet
should come, and witness a supremacy of nature such as he imagines in
the old days when the world's sires came forth at the tidings of the
rainbow in the cloud. The chance which opens to the meditative the
almost untouched regions of nature, is a rare one; and they should not
be left to the vanishing savage, the busy and the sordid.

I watched also the progress of conventional life. I saw it in every
stage of advancement, from the clearing in the woods, where the settler,
carrying merely his axe, makes his very tools, his house, his fireplace,
his bed, his table; carves out his fields, catches from among wild or
strayed animals his farm stock, and creates his own food, warmth, and
winter light,--from primitive life like this, to that of the highest
finish, which excludes all thought of analysis.

The position or prospects of men in a new country may best be made
intelligible by accounts of what the traveller saw and heard while among
them. Pictures serve the purpose better than reports. I will, therefore,
give pictures of some of the many varieties of dwellers that I saw,
amidst their different localities, circumstances, and modes of living.
No one of them is aware how vivid an idea he impresses on the mind of
humanity; nor how distinct a place he fills in her records. No one of
them, probably, is aware how much happier he is than Alexander, in
having before him more worlds to conquer.

My narratives, or pictures, must be but a few selected from among a
multitude. My chapter would extend to a greater length than any old
novel, if I were to give all I possess.

The United States are not only vast in extent: they are inestimably rich
in material wealth. There are fisheries and granite quarries along the
northern coasts; and shipping from the whole commercial world within
their ports. There are tanneries within reach of their oak woods, and
manufactures in the north from the cotton growth of the south. There is
unlimited wealth of corn, sugar-cane and beet, hemp, flax, tobacco, and
rice. There are regions of pasture land. There are varieties of grape
for wine, and mulberries for silk. There is salt. There are mineral
springs. There is marble, gold, lead, iron, and coal. There is a chain
of mountains, dividing the great fertile western valley from the busy
eastern region which lies between the mountains and the Atlantic. These
mountains yield the springs by which the great rivers are to be fed for
ever, to fertilize the great valley, and be the vehicle of its commerce
with the world. Out of the reach of these rivers, in the vast breadth of
the north, lie the great lakes, to be likewise the servants of commerce,
and to afford in their fisheries the means of life and luxury to
thousands. These inland seas temper the climate, summer and winter, and
insure health to the heart of the vast continent. Never was a country
more gifted by nature.

It is blessed also in the variety of its inhabitants. However it may
gratify the pride of a nation to be descended from one stock, it is
ultimately better that it should have been compounded from many nations.
The blending of qualities, physical and intellectual, the absorption of
national prejudices, the increase of mental resources, will be found in
the end highly conducive to the elevation of the national character.
America will find herself largely blessed in this way, however much she
may now complain of the immigration of strangers. She complains of some
for their poverty; but such bring a will to work, and a capacity for
labour. She complains of others for their coming from countries
governed by a despotism; but it is the love of freedom which they cannot
enjoy at home, that brings such. She complains of others that they keep
up their national language, manners, and modes of thinking, while they
use her privileges of citizenship. This may appear ungracious; but it
proceeds from that love of country and home institutions which will make
staunch American patriots of their children's children. It is all well.
The New England States may pride themselves on their population being
homogeneous, while that of other States is mongrel. It is well that
stability should thus have been temporarily provided for in one part of
the Union, which should, for the season, be the acknowledged superior
over the rest: but, this purpose of the arrangement having been
fulfilled, New England may perhaps hereafter admit, what some others see
already, that, if she inherits many of the virtues of the Pilgrims, she
requires fortifying in others; and that a large reinforcement from other
races would help her to throw off the burden of their inherited faults.

There can scarcely be a finer set of elements for the composition of a
nation than the United States now contain. It will take centuries to
fuse them; and by that time, pride of ancestry,--vanity of physical
derivation,--will be at an end. The ancestry of moral qualities will be
the only pedigree preserved: and of these every civilized nation under
heaven possesses an ample, and probably an equal, share. Let the United
States then cherish their industrious Germans and Dutch; their hardy
Irish; their intelligent Scotch; their kindly Africans, as well as the
intellectual Yankee, the insouciant Southerner, and the complacent
Westerner. All are good in their way; and augment the moral value of
their country, as diversities of soil, climate, and productions, do its
material wealth.

Among the most interesting personages in the United States, are the
Solitaries;--solitary families, not individuals. Europeans, who think it
much to lodge in a country cottage for six weeks in the summer, can form
little idea of the life of a solitary family in the wilds. I did not see
the most sequestered, as I never happened to lose my way in the forests
or on the prairies: but I witnessed some modes of life which realized
all I had conceived of the romantic, or of the dismal.

One rainy October day, I saw a settler at work in the forest, on which
he appeared to have just entered. His clearing looked, in comparison
with the forest behind him, of about the size of a pincushion. He was
standing, up to the knees in water, among the stubborn stumps, and
charred stems of dead trees. He was notching logs with his axe, beside
his small log hut and stye. There was swamp behind, and swamp on each
side;--a pool of mud around each dead tree, which had been wont to drink
the moisture. There was a semblance of a tumble-down fence: no orchard
yet; no grave-yard; no poultry; none of the graces of fixed habitation
had grown up. On looking back to catch a last view of the scene, I saw
two little boys, about three and four years old, leading a horse home
from the forest; one driving the animal behind with an armful of bush,
and the other reaching up on tiptoe to keep his hold of the halter; and
both looking as if they would be drowned in the swamp. If the mother was
watching from the hut, she must have thought this strange dismal play
for her little ones. The hard-working father must be toiling for his
children; for the success of his after life can hardly atone to him for
such a destitution of comfort as I saw him in the midst of. Many such
scenes are passed on every road in the western parts of the States. They
become cheering when the plough is seen, or a few sheep are straggling
on the hill side, seeming lost in space.

One day, at Niagara, I had spent hours at the Falls, till, longing for
the stillness of the forest, I wandered deep into its wild paths,
meeting nothing but the belled heifer, grazing, and the slim, clean
swine which live on the mast and roots they can find for themselves. I
saw some motion in a thicket, a little way from the path, and went to
see what it was. I found a little boy and girl, working away, by turns,
with an axe, at the branches of a huge hickory, which had been lately
felled. "Father" had felled the hickory the day before, and had sent the
children to make faggots from the branches. They were heated and out of
breath. I had heard of the toughness of hickory, and longed to know what
the labour of wood-cutting really was. Here was an irresistible
opportunity for an experiment I made the children sit down on the fallen
tree, and find out the use of my ear-trumpet, while I helped to make
their faggot. When I had hewn through one stout branch, I was quite
sufficiently warmed, and glad to sit down to hear the children's story.
Their father had been a weaver and a preacher in England. He had brought
out his wife and six children. During the week, he worked at his land,
finding some employment or another for all of his children who could
walk alone; and going some distance on Sundays to preach. This last
particular told volumes. The weaver has not lost heart over his hard
field-labour. His spirit must be strong and lively, to enable him to
spend his seventh day thus, after plying the axe for six. The children
did not seem to know whether they liked Manchester or the forest best;
but they looked stout and rosy.

They, however, were within reach of church and habitation; buried, as
they appeared, in the depths of the woods. I saw, in New Hampshire, a
family who had always lived absolutely alone, except when an occasional
traveller came to their door, during the summer months. The old man had
run away with his wife, forty-six years before, and brought her to the
Red Mountain, near the top of which she had lived ever since. It was
well that she married for love, for she saw no one but her husband and
children, for many a long year after she jumped out of her window, in
her father's house, to run away.

Our party, consisting of four, was in the humour to be struck with the
romance of the domestic history of the old man of the mountain, as the
guide is called. We had crossed Lake Winnepisseogee, the day before, and
watched from our piazza, at Centre Harbour, the softening of the evening
light over the broad sheet of water, and the purple islands that rested
upon it. After dark, fires blazed forth from the promontories, and
glimmered in the islands; every flaming bush and burning stem being
distinctly reflected in the grey mirror of the waters. These fires were
signs of civilization approaching the wild districts on which we were
entering. Land on the lake shores has become very valuable; and it is
being fast cleared.

We were to have set off very early on our mountain expedition, next day;
but the morning was misty, and we did not leave Centre Harbour till near
eight;--nearly an hour and a half after breakfast. We were in a wagon,
drawn by the horses on which the two ladies were to ascend the mountain
from the guide's house. The sky was grey, but promising; for its
curtains were rising at the other end of the lake, and disclosing ridge
after ridge of pines on the mountain side. The road became very rough as
we began to ascend; and it was a wonder to me how the wagon could be
lifted up, as it was, from shelf to shelf of limestone. One shelf sloped
a little too much, even for our wagon. Its line of direction was no
longer within the base, as children are taught at school that it should
be. All the party, except myself, rolled out. The driver, sprawling on
his back on a terribly sharp eminence of limestone, tugged manfully at
the reins, and shouted, "Whoi-ee" as cheerfully as if he had been
sitting on a cushion, in his proper place. He was not a man to desert
his duty in an extremity. He was but little hurt, and nobody else at
all.

The wagon was left here, and we ascended a mile, a steep path, among
woods and rocks, to the guide's little farm; plunging into a cloud, just
before we reached the house. It was baking day; and we found the old
dame, with a deaf and dumb daughter,--one of three deaf,--busy among new
bread, pies, and apples. Strings of apples hung against the walls; and
there was every symptom of plenty and contentment within and without
doors. The old dame might have been twin sister to Juliet's nurse. She
was delighted to have an opportunity of using her tongue, and was
profuse in her invitations to us to stay,--to come again,--to be
sociable. The exercise she takes in speaking must be one cause of her
buxom health. Out of a pantomime, I never saw anything so energetic as
her action; the deafness of her children being no doubt the cause of
this. She seemed heartily proud of them; the more, evidently, on account
of their singularity. She told us that the daughter now at home had
never left it. "Her father could not spare her to school; but I could
have spared her." What a life of little incidents magnified must their's
be! As one of my companions observed, the bursting of a shoe, or the
breaking of a plate, must furnish talk for a week. The welcome discovery
was made that we had a mutual acquaintance. A beloved friend of mine had
ascended the mountain some weeks before, and had followed her usual
practice of carrying away all the hearts she found there. The old dame
spoke lovingly of her as "that Liza;" and she talked about her till she
had seen my foot into the stirrup, and given me her blessing up the
mountain.

The path was steep, and the summit bare. There was an opening for a
single moment on our arrival; the mist parted and closed again, having
shown us what a view there was beneath us of green mountains, and blue
ponds, and wooded levels. We were entertained for some time with such
glimpses; more beautiful perhaps than an unrestricted vision. Such
revelations take away one's breath. When all was misty again, we amused
ourselves with gathering blue-berries, which grew profusely under foot.
The old man, too, was ready with any information we desired about
himself; and with abundance of anecdotes of summer travellers, to whom
he had acted as guide.

He was a soldier of the revolution; and at its close, retired hither,
with his bride, among bears and deer. There are no deer left; and he
killed nineteen bears with his own hand: the last, thirty-five years
before. One of them was nearly the death of him. A shot which he
intended to be mortal was not so. The wounded bear chased him; and there
was nothing to be done but to run round and round a tree, loading his
gun, while the bear was at his heels, blowing foam and blood upon him.
He fired over his shoulder, and dispatched his pursuer. He told us, when
the curtain of mist finally drew up, the opinions of learned men whom he
had conducted hither, about this mountain having once been an island in
the midst of a vast lake. He pointed out how it is, even now, nearly
surrounded by waters; Long Pond, Lake Winnepisseogee, and Squam Lake.
The two last are so crowded with islands that the expression of the
water is broken up. The islands lie in dark slips upon the gleamy
surface, dividing it into too many pond-like portions. But the mountain
horizon was altogether beautiful. Some had sharp peaks, some notched;
the sides of some were bare, with traces of tremendous slides: others,
green as the spring, with wandering sun gleams and cloud shadows. I
found myself much mistaken in my fancy that I did not care for
bird's-eye views.

The dame was looking out for us when we descended, anxious to detain us
for more talk, and to make us bearers of a present to "that Liza." She
hung some strings of her drying apples over the arm of a gentleman of
the party, with the utmost faith that he would take care of them all the
way to Boston. He kindly received them; and I can testify that he did
his best to make them reach their destination. It was kindness well
bestowed; for no doubt it was a winter luxury of the good dame's to
fancy our mutual friend enjoying her Red Mountain applesauce. The
sending a present to Boston must be a rare event to dwellers in such a
solitude.

Not many miles from this place, stands a deserted dwelling whose
inhabitants lived in a deeper solitude, and perished all in one night,
far from human aid. No house stands within many miles of it, even now. I
had heard the story before I saw the place; but I had no idea of the
difference between listening to a sad tale, and seeing the spot of which
it is told. In a deep narrow valley among the White Mountains, lived a
family of the name of Willey. Their dwelling was a comfortable
log-house, on a green platform, at the foot of one of the steepest
mountains. There were but few travellers among these mountains in their
day; but those few were kindly welcomed: and the cheerful host and
hostess, and their comely children, were always well spoken of. On a
stormy August night, 1826, a tremendous slide came crashing down the
mountain side, at the rear of the house. If the family had remained in
their chambers, they would have been safe: a rock at the edge of the
green platform, behind the dwelling, parted the slide, so that the
grassy plot remained untouched,--a bright island in the midst, of the
desolation. The family, to the number of nine, were overwhelmed, and all
perished. The bodies of seven were found. The bones of the other two are
doubtless buried under the slide, where rank verdure and young trees are
growing up, as if trying to efface the horrors of the wreck. The scene
must have been dreadful to those who first arrived at the spot, after
the event. The house, safe on its grass plot; its door standing wide;
the beds and clothes of the family showing that they had sprung up from
sleep, and so fled from the only place where they would have been safe;
no one there; a deadly silence brooding over the quiet spot, and chaotic
desolation around;--it is no wonder that the house remains deserted, and
the valley untenanted.

Some miles further on, the traveller may witness what comfortable cheer
may be afforded by dwellers in the wilderness. All travellers in the
White Mountains know Ethan A. Crawford's hospitality. He cannot be said
to live in solitude, inasmuch as there is another house in the valley:
but everybody is aware how little sociability there is between two
dwellers in a lonely place. One may enjoy life there; and several may
get on well; but two never: and Ethan Crawford's is a virtual solitude,
except for three months in the year. The fate of the Willeys was
uppermost in our minds when we arrived; and we were little prepared for
such entertainment as we found. After a supper of fine lake trout, a son
of our host played to us on a nameless instrument, made by the joiners
who put the house together, and highly creditable to their ingenuity. It
was something like the harmonica in form, and the bagpipes in tone; but,
well-played as it was by the boy, it was highly agreeable. Then Mr.
Crawford danced an American jig, to the fiddling of a relation of his.
The dancing was somewhat solemn; but its good faith made up for any want
of mirth. He had other resources for the amusement of his guests: a gun
wherewith he was wont to startle the mountain echoes, till, one day, it
burst: (leaving nothing for us to do but to look at the fragments:)
also, a horn, which, blown on a calm day, brings a chorus of sweet
responses from the far hill sides. Retirement in such a valley, and with
such resources as Ethan Crawford's, is attractive enough to the passing
traveller; and, to judge by the countenance of the host, anything but
dispiriting to those who have made trial of it.

No solitude can be more romantic than that at the mouth of the Mammoth
Cave in Kentucky; so called, not because any mammoth-bones have been
found there, but because it is the largest explored cave in the world. I
was told, not only by the guides, but by a gentleman who is learned in
caves, that it can be travelled through, in different directions, to the
extent of sixty miles. We could not think of achieving the entire
underground journey; but we resolved to see all we could; and, for that
purpose, preferred devoting the half of two days to the object, to one
entire day, the weariness of which would probably curtail our rambles.
After a most interesting and exciting journey of nearly two nights and
a day from Nashville, Tennessee, our party, consisting of four, arrived
at Bell's hotel, twelve miles from the cave, at half-past seven, on a
bright May morning. We slept till one o'clock, and then set off in a
stage and four for the cave. My expectations had been so excited, that
every object on the road seemed to paint itself on my very spirit; and I
now feel as if I saw the bright hemp fields, the oak copses, the
gorgeous wild flowers, and clear streams, running over their limestone
beds, that adorned our short journey.

The house at the cave stands on the greenest sward that earth and dews
can produce; and it grows up to the very walls of the dwelling. The
well, with its sweep,--a long pole, with a rope and bucket at one end,
laid across the top of a high post,--this primitive well, on the same
plot of turf, and the carriage in which two travellers--young men--had
just arrived, were the only occupiers of the grass, besides the house.
We lost no time in proceeding to the cave. The other party of travellers
and the guides carried lamps, and grease to trim them with; an ample
supply of both; for the guides know something of the horrors of being
left in darkness in the mazes of a cave. We went down a steep path into
a glen, from which the golden sunlight seemed reflected, as from water;
so bright was the May verdure. The guides carried our cloaks; which
seemed to us very ridiculous; for we were panting with the heat. But,
when we had wound down to the yawning, shadowy cave, with its diamond
drips and clustering creepers about the entrance, a blast of wintry wind
gushed from it, and chilled our very hearts. I found it possible to
stand on one foot, and be in the midst of melting heat; and leaning
forward on the other, to feel half frozen. The humming birds must be
astonished, when they flit across the entrance, to meet winter in the
middle of the glen, and emerge into summer again on the other side.

The entrance of the cave serves as an ice-house to the family of the
guide. They keep their meat there, and go to refresh themselves when
relaxed by the heat. The temperature is delightful, after the first two
or three minutes; and we were glad to leave our cloaks by the way side.
The ladies tied handkerchiefs over their heads, and tucked up their
gowns for the scramble over the loose limestone; looking thereby very
picturesque, and not totally unlike the witches in Macbeth. The gloom,
the echo of the footsteps, the hollow sound of voices, the startling
effect of lights seen unexpectedly in a recess, in a crevice, or high
overhead,--these impressions may be recalled in those who have wandered
in caves, but can never be communicated to those who have not. It is in
vain to describe a cave. Call it a chaos of darkness and rocks, with
wandering and inexplicable sounds and motions, and all is done.
Everything appears alive: the slowly growing stalactites, the water ever
dropping into the plashing pool, the whispering airs,--all seem
conscious. The coolness, vastness, suggestions of architecture, and dim
disclosures, occasion different feelings from any that are known under
the lights of the sky. The air in the neighbourhood of the waterfall was
delicious to breathe; and the pool was so clear that I could not, for
some time, see the water, in a pretty full light. That Rembrandt light
on the drip of water, on the piled rocks, and on our figures,--light
swallowed up before it could reach the unseen canopy under which we
stood, can never be forgotten. Milton's lake of fire might have brought
the roof into view:--nothing less.

The young guides, brothers, were fine dashing youths, as Kentucky youths
are. They told us some horrible tales, and one very marvellous story
about darkness and bewilderment in the labyrinth of the cave. They told
us (before they knew that any of us were English) that "all the lords
and lights of England had been to see the cave, except the king." While
they were about it, they might as well have included his majesty.
Perhaps they have, by this time; good stories being of very rapid
growth. They reported that ladies hold on in the cave better than
gentlemen. One of the party supposed this was because they were lighter;
but the guide believed it was owing to their having more curiosity.

I was amused at their assurances about the number of miles that we had
walked; and thought it as good a story as any they had told us: but, to
my utter amazement, I found, on emerging from the cave, that the stars
were shining resplendently down into the glen, while the summer
lightning was quivering incessantly over the "verdurous wall" which
sprang up to a lofty height on either hand. There seemed to be none of
the coolness of night abroad. A breathless faintness came over us on
quitting the freshness of the cave, and taught us the necessary caution
of resting awhile at the entrance.

Supper was ready when we returned; and then the best room was assigned
to the three ladies, while the gentlemen were to have the loft. We saw
the stars through chinks in our walls; but it was warm May, and we
feared no cold. Shallow tin-pans,--milk-pans, I believe,--were furnished
to satisfy our request for ewer and basin. The windows had blinds of
paper-hanging; a common sort of window-blind at hotels, and in country
places. Before it was light, I was wakened by a strong cold breeze
blowing upon me; and at dawn, I found that the entire lower half of the
window was absent. A deer had leaped through it, a few weeks before; and
there had been no opportunity of mending it. But everything was clean;
everybody was obliging; the hostess was motherly; and the conclusion
that we came to in the morning was that we had all slept well, and were
ready for a second ramble in the cave.

We saw, this day, the Grotto and the Deserted Chamber. Few visitors
attempt the grotto, the entrance to it being in one part only a foot and
a half high. We were obliged, not only to go on hands and knees, but to
crawl lying flat. It is a sensation worth knowing, to feel oneself
imprisoned in the very heart of a mountain, miles from the sun-light,
and with no mode of escape but the imperceptible hole which a child
might block up in five minutes. Never was there a more magnificent
prison or sepulchre. Whether the singularity of our mode of access
magnified to our eyes the beauties we had thereby come into the midst
of, or whether Nature does work most _con amore_ in retired places, this
grotto seemed to us all by far the most beautiful part of the cave. The
dry sandy floor was pleasant to the tread, after the loose limestone;
the pillars were majestic; the freaks of nature most wild and elegant.
The air was so fresh and cool that, if only a Rosicrucian lamp could be
hung in this magnificent chamber, it would be the place of all others in
which to spend the sultry summer's day,--entering when the beauties of
the sunrise had given place to glare, and issuing forth at the rising of
the evening star.

On our way to the Deserted Chamber, we cut off half a mile by a descent
through a crevice, and a re-ascent by another. We were presently
startled by the apparition of two yellow stars, at what appeared an
immeasurable distance. In this cave, I was reminded, after a total
forgetfulness of many years, of the night-mare visitations of my
childhood; especially of the sense of infinite distance, which used to
terrify me indescribably. Here, too, the senses and the reason were
baulked. Those two yellow stars might have been worlds, many millions of
miles off in space, or,--what they were,--two shabby lamps, fifty yards
off. A new visitor had arrived; and the old man of the solitary house
had brought him down, in hopes of meeting our larger party. One of the
gentlemen presently slipped on the loose stones, and fell into a hole,
with his back against a sharp rock; and he seemed at first unable to
rise. This was the only misadventure we had; and it did not prove a
serious one. He was somewhat shaken and bruised, and rendered unwilling
to go with the rest to the Bottomless Pit: but there was no eventual
injury. He and I staid in the Deserted Chamber, while our companions
disappeared, one by one, through a crevice, on their way to the pit. The
dead silence, and the glimmer of our single lamp, were very striking;
and we were more disposed to look round upon the low-roofed apartment,
piled with stones as far as the eye could reach, than to talk. I tried
to swallow a piece of bread or cake, very like a shoe-sole, and
speculated upon these piles of stones;--by whose hand they were reared,
and how long ago. There is much cane--doubtless, once used for
fuel--scattered about the deeper recesses of the cave; and these stones
were evidently heaped up by human hands: and those not Indian. It is
supposed that this cave was made use of by that mysterious race which
existed before the Indians, and of which so many curious traces remain
in the middle States of the West; a race more civilized, to judge by the
works of their hands, than the Indians have ever been; but of which no
tradition remains.

Our party returned safe, and refreshed by a draught of water, better
worth having than my luncheon of bread. When we left the cave, our
guides insisted upon it that we had walked, this morning, ten or eleven
miles. I pronounced it four. Others of the party said seven; and the
point remains unsettled. We all agreed that it was twice as much as we
could have accomplished in the heat above ground; and perhaps the most
remarkable walk we had ever taken in our lives. Our hostess was with us
the whole time; and it was amusing to see in her the effect of custom.
She trod the mazes of this cave just as people do the walks of their own
garden.

The gush of sun-light pouring in at the mouth of the cave, green and
soft, as we emerged from the darkness, was exquisitely beautiful. So was
the foliage of the trees, after the rigid forms which had been printing
themselves upon our eye-sight for so many hours. As we sat at the
entrance, to accustom ourselves to the warm outward air, I saw, growing
high in the steep woods, the richest of kalmias, in full bloom. One of
the gentlemen ran to bring me some; and when it came, it was truly a
feast to the eye. How apt are we to look upon all things as made for us!
How many seasons has this kalmia bloomed?

We were truly sorry to bid farewell to our motherly hostess, and her
"smart" sons. Theirs is a singular mode of life; and it left nearly as
vivid an impression on our minds as their mighty neighbour, the cave. If
any of us should ever happen to be banished, and to have a home to seek,
I fancy we should look out for a plot of green sward, among flowering
kalmias, near the mouth of an enormous cave, with humming birds flitting
about it by day, and fire-flies and summer lightning by night.


In strong contrast in my mind with such a scene as this, stands a gay
encampment in the wilderness, at which I soon after arrived. The
watering places among the Virginia mountains are as new and striking a
spectacle as the United States can afford. The journeyings of those who
visit them are a perpetual succession of contrasts. I may as well give
the whole journey from Cincinnati to the eastern base of the
Alleghanies.

We left Cincinnati at noon on the 25th of June: as sultry a summer's day
as ever occurs on the Ohio. The glare was reflected from the water with
a blinding and scorching heat; and feather fans were whisking all day in
the ladies' cabin of our steam-boat. Hot as it was, I could not remain
in the shady cabin. The shores of the Ohio are so beautiful, that I
could not bear to lose a single glimpse between the hills. It is
holiday-travelling to have such a succession of pictures as I saw there
made to pass noiselessly before one's eyes. There were the children
running among the gigantic trees on the bank, to see the boat pass; the
girl with her milk-pail, half way up the hill; the horseman on the
ridge, or the wagoner with his ox-team pausing on the slope. Then there
was the flitting blue jay under the cool shadow of the banks; the
butterflies crossing the river in zig-zag flight; the terrapins (small
turtle) floundering in the water, with their pert little heads above the
surface; and the glancing fire-flies every night.

On the afternoon of this day, we were met by the storm which swept over
the whole country, and which will be remembered as having caused the
death of the son of Chief-Justice Marshall, at Baltimore, on his way to
his dying father. I watched, from the deck, the approach of the storm.
First, the sky, above the white clouds, was of a dark grey, which might
have been mistaken for the deep blue of twilight. Then a mass of black
clouds came hurrying up below the white. Then a flash escaped from out
of the upper grey, darting perpendicularly into the forest; and then
another, exploding like the four rays of a star. I saw the squall
coming in a dark line, straight across the river. Our boat was hurried
under the bank to await it. The burst was furious: a roaring gust, and a
flood of rain, which poured in under our cabin door, close shut as it
was. All was nearly as dark as night for a while, and all silent but the
elements. Then the day seemed to dawn again; but loud peals of thunder
lasted long, and the lightning was all abroad in the air. Faint flashes
now wandered by; and now a brilliant white zig-zag quivered across the
sky. One splendid violet-coloured shaft shot straight down into the
forest; and I saw a tall tree first blaze and then smoulder at the
touch. A noble horse floated by, dead and swollen. When we drew out into
the middle of the river, it was as if spring had come in at the heels of
the dog-days; all was so cool and calm.

The company on board were of the lowest class we ever happened to meet
with in our travels. They were obliging enough; as everybody is
throughout the country, as far as my experience goes; but otherwise they
were no fair specimens of American manners. One woman excited my
curiosity from the beginning; but I entertained a much more agreeable
feeling towards her when we parted, after several days' travelling in
company. Her first deed was to ask where we were going; and her next, to
take my book out of my lap, and examine it. Much of the rest of her time
was occupied in dressing her hair, which was, notwithstanding, almost as
rough as a negro's. She wore in her head a silver comb, another set with
brilliants, and a third, an enormous tortoiseshell, so stuck in, on one
side, as to remind the observer, irresistibly, of a unicorn. She pulled
down her hair in company, and put it up again, many times in a day,
whenever, as it seemed to me, she could not think of anything else to
be doing. Her young companion, meantime, sat rubbing her teeth with
dragon-root. The other cabin company seemed much of the same class. I
was dressing in my state room between four and five the next morning,
when an old lady, who was presently going ashore, burst in, and snatched
the one tumbler glass from my hand. She was probably as much amazed at
my having carried it out of sight as I was at her mode of recovering it.

I loved the early morning on the great rivers, and therefore rose at
dawn. I loved the first grey gleams that came from between the hills,
and the bright figures of people in white, (the men all in linen jackets
in hot weather,) on the banks. I loved to watch the river craft; the
fussy steamer making rapid way; the fairy canoe shooting silently
across; the flat-boat, with its wreath of blue smoke, stealing down in
the shadow of the banks, her navigators helping her along in the current
by catching at the branches as they passed: and the perilous looking
raft, with half-a-dozen people on it, under their canopy of green
boughs, their shapeless floor bending and walloping in the middle of the
stream. I loved the trees, looking as if they stood self-poised, their
roots were washed so bare. I loved the dwellings that stood behind their
screen, those on the eastern bank seeming fast asleep; those on the
western shore gay with the flickering shadows cast on them by the breezy
sunrise through the trees.

On passing Catletsburgh we bade adieu to glorious Kentucky. At that
point, our eyes rested on three sovereign States at one glance, Ohio,
Kentucky, and Virginia. We landed at Guyandot, and proceeded by stage
the next morning to Charleston, on the Kanawha river. The road, all the
way to the Springs, is marvellously good for so wild a part of the
country. The bridges over the streams are, some of them, prettily
finished; and the accommodations by the road side are above the average.
The scenery is beautiful the whole way. We were leaving the great
Western Valley; and the road offered a succession of ascents and levels.
There were many rivulets and small waterfalls; the brier-rose was in
full bloom along the ground; the road ran half way up the wooded hills,
so that there were basins of foliage underneath, the whole apparently
woven into so compact a mass by the wild vine, that it seemed as if one
might walk across the valley on the tree tops. The next day's dawn broke
over the salt works and coal pits, or rather caverns of coal, on the
hill sides. The corn was less tall and rich, the trees were less lofty,
and it was apparent that we were mounting to a higher region. It
occurred to me, in a careless kind of way, that we were now not very far
from the Hawk's Nest. Some ladies in the Guyandot Hotel had said to me,
"Be sure you see the Hawk's Nest." "What is that?" "A place that
travellers can see if they choose; the driver always stops a few minutes
to let them see the Hawk's Nest." I had never heard of it before, and I
never heard of it again. The world is fairly awakened to Niagara; but it
is still drowsy about two scenes which moved me--the one more than
Niagara, the other nearly as much; the platform at Pine Orchard House,
on the top of the Catshills, and the Hawk's Nest.

The last of the Kanawha River, as we bade adieu to it on the 28th of
June, was smooth and sweet, with its islets of rocks, and the pretty
bridge by which we crossed the Gauley, and entered upon the ascent above
New River. The Gauley and the New River join to make the Kanawha. The
ascent of the mountains above New River is trying to weak nerves. The
horses have to stop, here and there, to rest; and it appears that if
they were to back three steps, it would be death. The road, however, is
really broad, though it appears a mere ledge when the eye catches the
depth below, where the brown river is rushing and brawling in its rocky
bed. A passenger dropped his cap in the steepest part, and the driver
made no difficulty about stopping to let him recover it. What a depth it
was! like the dreamy visions of one's childhood of what winged
messengers may first learn of man's dwelling-place, when they light on a
mountain-top; like Satan's glimpses from the Mount of Soliloquy; like
any unusual or forbidden peep from above into the retirements of nature,
or the arrangements of man. On our left rose the blasted rocks which had
been compelled to yield us a passage; but their aspect was already
softened by the trails of crimson and green creepers which were
spreading over their front. The unmeasured pent-house of wild vine was
still below us on the right, with rich rhododendron blossoms bursting
through, and rock-plants shooting up from every ledge and crevice at the
edge of the precipice. After a long while, (I have nothing to say of
time or distance, for I thought of neither,) a turn in the road shut out
the whole from our sight. I leaned out of the stage, further and
further, to catch, as I supposed, a last glimpse of the tremendous
valley; and when I drew in again, it was with a feeling of deep grief
that such a scene was to be beheld by me no more. I saw a house, a
comfortable homestead, in this wild place, with its pasture and
corn-fields about it; and I longed to get out, and ask the people to let
me live with them.

In a few minutes the stage stopped. "If any of the passengers wish to go
to the Hawk's Nest ..." shouted the driver. He gave us ten minutes, and
pointed with his whip to a beaten path in the wood to the right. It
seems to me now that I was unaccountably cool and careless about it. I
was absorbed by what I had seen, or I might have known, from the
direction we were taking, that we were coming out above the river again.
We had not many yards to go. We issued suddenly from the covert of the
wood, upon a small platform of rock;--a Devil's Pulpit it would be
called, if its present name were not so much better;--a platform of
rock, springing from the mountain side, without any visible support, and
looking sheer down upon an angle of the roaring river, between eleven
and twelve hundred feet below. Nothing whatever intervenes. Spread out
beneath, shooting up around, are blue mountain peaks, extending in
boundless expanse. No one, I believe, could look down over the edge of
this airy shelf, but for the stunted pines which are fast rooted in it.
With each arm clasping a pine-stem, I looked over, and saw more, I
cannot but think, than the world has in reserve to show me.

It is said that this place was discovered by Chief Justice Marshall,
when, as a young man, he was surveying among the mountains. But how many
Indians knew it before? How did it strike the mysterious race who gave
place to the Indians? Perhaps one of these may have stood there to see
the summer storm careering below; to feel that his foothold was too
lofty to be shaken by the thunderpeals that burst beneath; to trace the
quiverings of the lightnings afar, while the heaven was clear above his
own head. Perhaps this was the stand chosen by the last Indian, from
which to cast his lingering glance upon the glorious regions from which
the white intruders were driving his race. If so, here he must have
pined and died, or hence he must have cast himself down. I cannot
conceive that from this spot any man could turn away, to go into exile.
But it cannot be that Marshall was more than the earliest of Saxon race
who discovered this place. Nature's thrones are not left to be first
mounted by men who can be made Chief Justices. We know not what races of
wild monarchs may have had them first.

We travelled the rest of the day through an Alpine region, still full of
beauty. The road is so new that the stopping places seemed to have no
names. The accommodations were wonderfully good. At eleven we reached a
place where we were allowed, not only to sup, but to lie down for two
hours; a similar mercy to that afforded us the night before. Those who
are impatient of fatigue should not attempt this method of reaching the
Virginia Springs, though they are much to be pitied if they adopt any
other. Our first re-entrance upon the world was at Lewisburg, at noon,
on the 29th. It appears to be a neat village. The militia were parading:
very respectable men, I do not doubt, but not much like soldiers. In a
quarter of an hour we were off for the White Sulphur Springs, nine miles
(of dusty road) from Lewisburg, and arrived there at half-past two, just
as the company were dispersing about the walks, after dinner.

Nothing could be more striking than the contrast between our stage-coach
society and that which was thronging the green area into which we were
driven. We were heated, wearied, shabby, and all of one dust colour,
from head to foot, and, I doubt not, looking very sheepish under the
general stare. Every body else was gay and spruce, and at full leisure
to criticise us. Gentlemen in the piazza in glossy coats and polished
pumps; ladies in pink, blue, and white, standing on green grass, shading
their delicate faces and gay head-dresses under parasols; never was
there a more astonishing contrast than all this presented with what we
had been seeing of late. The friends who were expecting us, however,
were not ashamed of us, and came bounding over the green to welcome us,
and carry us within reach of refreshment.

It was doubtful whether "a cabin" could be spared to us. We were
fortunate in being so favoured as to be put in possession of one in the
course of the afternoon. Several carriages full of visitors arrived
within a few days, each with its load of trunks, its tin pail dangling
behind (wherewith to water the horses in the wilderness) and its crowd
of expecting and anxious faces at the windows, and were turned back to
seek a resting-place elsewhere. That we were accommodated at all, I
believe to this day to be owing to some secret self-denying ordinance on
the part of our friends.

On one side of the green, are the large rooms, in which the company at
the Springs dine, play cards, and dance. Also, the bar-room, and stage,
post, and superintendent's offices. The cabins are disposed round the
other sides, and dropped down, in convenient situations behind. These
cabins consist of one, two, or more rooms, each containing a bed, a
table, a looking-glass, and two or three chairs. All company is received
in a room with a bed in it: there is no help for it. The better cabins
have a piazza in front; and all have a back door opening upon the hill
side; so that the attendants, and their domestic business, are kept out
of sight.

The sulphur fountain is in the middle of the southern end of the green;
and near it is the sulphur bathing-house. The fountain rises in the
midst of a small temple, which is surmounted by a statue of Hygeia,
presented to the establishment by a grateful visitor from New Orleans.

The water, pure and transparent, and far more agreeable to the eye than
to the taste, forms a pool in its octagon-shaped cistern; and hither
the visitors lounge, three times a day, to drink their two or three
half-pint tumblers of nauseousness.

I heard many complaints, from new-comers, of the drowsiness caused by
drinking the water. Some lay down to sleep more than once in the day;
and others apologised for their dulness in society; but this is only a
temporary effect, if one may judge by the activity visible on the green
from morning till night. One of the greatest amusements was to listen to
the variety of theories afloat about the properties and modes of
application of the waters.

These springs had been visited only about fifteen years. No
philosophising on cases appears to have been instituted: no recording,
classifying, inferring, and stating. The patients come from distances of
a thousand miles in every direction, with a great variety of complaints;
they grow better or do not; they go away, and nobody is the wiser for
their experience. It would be difficult to trace them, and to make a
record of anything more than their experience while on the spot. The
application of these waters will probably continue for a long time to be
purely empirical. All that is really known to the patients themselves
is, that they are first sleepy, then ravenous; that they must then leave
the White Sulphur Spring, and go to the Warm Springs, to be bathed; then
to the Sweet Springs, to be braced; and then home, to send all their
ailing friends into Virginia next year.

Upwards of two hundred visitors were accommodated when I was in the
White Sulphur Valley; and cabins were being built in all directions. The
valley, a deep basin among the mountains; presents such beauties to the
eye, as perhaps few watering-places in the world can boast. There has
been no time yet to lay them open, for the benefit of the invalids; but
there are plans for the formation of walks and drives through the woods,
and along the mountain sides. At present, all is wild, beyond the
precincts of the establishment; and, for the pleasure of the healthy,
for those who can mount, and ramble, and scramble, it seems a pity that
it should not remain so. The mocking-bird makes the woods ring with its
delicious song; and no hand has bridged the rapid streams. If you want
to cross them, you must throw in your own stepping-stones. If you desire
to be alone, you have only to proceed from the gate of the establishment
to the first turn in the road, force your way into the thicket, and look
abroad from your retreat upon as sweet and untouched a scene of mountain
and valley as the eye of the red man loves to rest upon. The gentlemen
who are not invalids go out shooting in the wilderness. A friend of mine
returned from such an expedition, the day after my arrival. He brought
home a deer; had been overtaken by a storm in the mountains, and had,
with his companions, made a house and a fire. Such amusements would
diversify the occupations of Bath and Cheltenham very agreeably.

The morning after our arrival, we were too weary to be roused by the
notice bell, which rings an hour before every meal; and we were ready
only just in time for the last bell. Breakfast is carried to the cabins,
if required; but every person who is able prefers breakfasting in
company. On rainy mornings, it is a curious sight to see the company
scudding across the green to the public-room, under umbrellas, and in
cloaks and india-rubber shoes. Very unlike the slow pace, under a
parasol, in a July sun.

There was less meat on the table at breakfast and tea than I was
accustomed to see. The bread and tea were good. For the other eatables
there is little to be said. It is a table spread in the wilderness; and
a provision of tender meat and juicy vegetables for two or three
hundred people is not to be had for the wishing. The dietary is sure to
be improved, from year to year; the most that is to be expected at
present is, that there should be enough for everybody. The sum paid for
board per week is eight dollars; and other charges may make the expenses
mount up to twelve. Pitchers of water and of milk may be seen, at every
meal, all down the tables; little or no wine.

The establishment is under the management of the proprietor, who has
been offered 500,000 dollars for it, that it may be conducted by a
company of share-holders, who would introduce the necessary
improvements. When I was there, the proprietor was still holding off
from this bargain, the company not being willing to continue to him the
superintendence of the concern. I hope that arrangements, satisfactory
to all parties, may have been made by this time. The average gross
receipts of a season were reported to be 50,000 dollars. It was added
that these might easily be doubled, if all were done that might be.

Rheumatism and liver complaints seemed the most common grievances. Two
little girls, perhaps four and five years old, sat opposite to me, who
were sufferers from rheumatism. But the visitors who came for pleasure
seemed to outnumber considerably those who came for health.

After breakfast, we sauntered about the green, and visited various new
acquaintances in their piazzas. Then we went home for our bonnets, and
rambled through the woods, till we were sent back by the rain, and took
shelter beside the fountain. The effect was strange of seeing there a
family of emigrants, parents and nine children, who were walking from
North Carolina into Illinois. There must have been twins among these
children, so many of them looked just alike. The contrast between this
group of way-worn travellers, stopping out of curiosity to taste the
waters, and the gay company among whom they very properly held up their
independent heads, was striking to a stranger.

We dined at two; and afterwards found that a fire would be comfortable,
though it was the last day of June. As many friends as our room would
hold came home with us, and sat on the bed, table, and the few chairs we
could muster, while one made the wood fire, and another bought
ice-creams, which a country lad brought to the door. These ice-creams
seemed to be thin custard, with a sprinkling of snow in it; but the boy
declared that they were ice-creams when he left home. When we had
finished our dessert, washed and returned the glasses, and joked and
talked till the new-comers of our party grew ashamed of their
drowsiness, we crossed the green to diversify the afternoon amusements
of certain of our friends. Some were romping with their dogs; some
reading books brought by themselves; (for there is no library yet;) some
playing at chess or backgammon; all deploring the rain.

After tea, we stormed the great scales, and our whole party were
individually weighed. It must be an interesting occupation to the
valetudinarians of the place to watch their own and each others' weight,
from day to day, or from week to week. For my part, I found my weight
just what it always has been, the few times in my life that I have
remembered to ascertain it. Such unenviable persons can never make a
pursuit of the scales, as others can whose gravity is more
discriminating.--From the scales, we adjourned to the ball-room, where I
met friends and acquaintances from Mobile and New Orleans; saw
new-comers from the Carolinas and Georgia; was introduced to personages
of note from Boston; recognized some whom I had known at Philadelphia;
and sat between two gentlemen who had fought a duel. There was music,
dancing, and refreshments; laughing and flirting here; grave
conversation there;--all the common characteristics of a ball, with the
added circumstances that almost every State in the Union was here
represented; and that we were gathered together in the heart of the
mountains.

One more visit remained to be paid this day. We had promised to look in
upon some friends who were not at the ball, in order to try the charms
and virtues of egg-nogg, which had been lauded to us by an eminent
statesman, who has had opportunity, during his diplomatic missions, to
learn what there is best in this world. The egg-nogg having been duly
enjoyed, we at length went home, to write letters as long as we could
hold up our heads, after so extremely busy a day:--a day which may be
considered a fair specimen of life at the White Sulphur Springs.

One of the personages whom I referred to as low company, at the
beginning of my story, declared himself in the stage-coach to be a
gambler, about to visit the Springs for professional purposes. He said
to another man, who looked fit company for him, that he played higher at
faro than any man in the country but one. These two men slept while we
were mounting to the Hawk's Nest. People who pursue their profession by
night, as such people do, must sleep in the day, happen what may. They
were rather self-important during the journey; it was a comfort to see
how poor a figure they cut at the Springs. They seemed to sink into the
deepest insignificance that could be desired. Such persons are the pests
of society in the south and west; and they are apt to boast that their
profession is highly profitable in the eastern cities. I fear this is no
empty vaunt.

We left the White Sulphur Springs, a party of six, in "an extra
exclusive return stage," and with two saddle horses. Nothing could be
more promising. The stage was perfectly new, having been used only to
bring General C---- and his lady from Philadelphia to the Springs. We
had a shrewd and agreeable Yankee driver, for the whole way. The weather
was as fine as July weather ought to be; and as cool as is its wont near
the tops of mountains: the very weather for the saddle, or for having
the stage open on all sides; or for walking. The alternations were
frequently tried. Roses and mountain laurels adorned our road; the
breezy woods cast their shadows over us; and we remembered what waters
were springing beneath us;--that we were passing over the sources of the
mighty rivers of the West, which we had lately navigated with deep awe
and delight. The few dwellings we passed were almost all houses of
entertainment; but nothing could be more quiet than their air, nestling
as they did in the most enviable situations, and resembling more the
lodges in the avenues of the parks of English gentry than the hotels of
the high road.

We reached the Sweet Springs, twelve miles, I believe, from the White
Sulphur, at half-past two. We were as hungry as mountain travellers
should be, and dinner was over. However, we were soon set down to hot
stewed venison, beet, hominy, ham, and fruit pies; and, thus reinforced,
we issued forth to examine the place. The spring at the bathhouse looked
so tempting, that I resolved to bathe at sun-down, which, in this
valley, would be at five o'clock. The establishment here is inferior to
the one we had left. The green was not paled in; the cabins were more
shabby; the dining-room smaller. We had it almost to ourselves. The
season had not begun, few having been yet sufficiently sulphured and
bathed elsewhere to come here to be braced. The water is a little warm;
it has a slight briskness; and bubbles up prettily in its well under the
piazza. The luxury is to have nothing to do with its disagreeable taste,
but to bathe in it, as it gushes, tepid, from its spout. It would be
worth while, if there were nothing but trouble in crossing the mountains
to get to it. The Sweet Springs lie in one of the highest valleys of the
Alleghanies, and one of the fairest. Five times that afternoon did I
climb the steep breezy slope behind our cabin, bringing first one of our
party, then another, to look abroad; and then returning to enjoy the
sun-set alone. The crowds of blue peaks, the bright clearings, the
clumps of forest trees, lilac in the sunset with the shepherds lying in
their shadow, and the sheep grazing on the sunny slopes, the cluster of
cabins below, with their thin smokes rising straight into the golden
air,--the whole looked as if the near heavens had opened to let down a
gush of their inner light upon this high region. Never shall I forget
those tufty purple hills. Cold twilight came on; and we sat round a
blazing wood fire, telling ghost and murder stories till we could have
declared it was a Christmas night.

At supper, I observed a hale, brisk, intellectual-looking gentleman who
satisfied himself with a basin of liquid; as he did at breakfast the
next morning; and as he may be seen to do at every meal he takes. He
told us his story. Twenty years before, he nearly closed his oesophagus
by taking too powerful an emetic. For twenty years, he has had no
illness; he rises at dawn all the year round, and has never been known
to be low-spirited for two minutes. We all began to think of living upon
liquids; but I have not heard of any of the party having proceeded
beyond the suggestion.

We rose at five, the next morning, having thirty mountain miles to go
during the day, with the same horses. It must not be supposed that this
mountain travelling is scrambling among craggy peaks, piercing through
dark defiles, and so forth. The roads wind so gently among the slopes,
that a sleeping or blind traveller would not discover that the carriage
was not, for the greater part of the time, proceeding on level ground.
Woody slopes at hand, and a crowd of blue summits afar, are the most
characteristic features of the scenery. A white speck of a house, on its
tiny green clearing, comes into sight, high up among the hills, from a
turn in the road, and the traveller says to himself, "What a perch to
live on!" In two hours, he stops at that very house to dine, not being
aware how he has got up to it, and looking round with wonder on the snug
comforts of the homestead.

Our thirty miles of this day were delicious. Having breakfasted, we bade
adieu, at half-past six, to the Sweet Springs, steaming in the bitter
cold morning air, and followed a gentleman of our party who had
proceeded on foot to the top of the first ridge. There we found him,
sitting under a tree, having succeeded in warming himself by the walk.
Up the second ridge, the whole party walked, I having started off, ahead
of the rest. It was warm, and I stopped, here and there, to rest and
gather wild flowers. The rhododendrons and kalmias grew in profusion;
and there were plenty of roses, the fine orange columbine of the hills,
vetches, and a few splendid scarlet lilies. The peeps down into abysses
of foliage were glorious; and, yet more, the cloudlike expanse of
mountain tops, growing bluer and fainter till they faded quite away. A
steep road on an opposite mountain was the only sign of humanity being
near. On the summit, however, there was a small farm. In it lived an
elderly woman, who had never been further from the spot than eight
miles. If she was born to travel no further than eight miles, no better
dwelling place could have been assigned her; for hence she sees more at
a glance, any sunset, than some, with all means of locomotion, have ever
beheld.

It was a strange feeling, the beginning to descend. It was strange to
cross, soon after, the path of the tornado. I had seen something of its
ravages before, on the banks of the Cumberland river: the stoutest
forest-trees wrenched and twisted, like red-hot iron in the vice of the
blacksmith; and snapped off, all at the same height; so that the forest
looked like a gigantic scorched stubble-field. Here, a similar
desolation was seen in immediate contrast with the rich fertility of the
little valley beneath. The hurricane had seared a path for itself up the
mountain side, passing over the lowly roofs in the depths. We arrived to
dinner at a house on Barber Creek, where we entreated to be fed without
delay, on anything whatsoever that was eatable; as time was precious,
this day. Yet were we kept waiting two hours and a half. I found much to
do by the creek side watching the minnows making their way up against
the current; watching two girls who had set up their washing
establishment in pretty style under a tree beside the water; their wood
fire, black cauldron, and stand of tubs; while the bushes stood round
about to be used as drying horses. I also actually saw a hog voluntarily
walk three times through the clear water; and the delay of the dinner
afforded time for speculation whether the race was not improving. When
the dinner was on the table, no one of us could tell what it consisted
of. The dish from which I ate was, according to some, mutton; to others,
pork: my own idea is that it was dog. Whatever it was, it was at last
done with, and paid for, and I was in my saddle, listening to the creek
as it rattled under the grey rocks. Having crossed one mountain top on
foot, in the morning, I was about to pass another on my horse this
afternoon. There is no describing what it is to be pacing upwards, on
the extreme edge of the steep road, with one's feet hanging over the
green abyss; the shadowy mountains retreating, advancing, interlacing,
opening, to disclose a low far-off bit of meadow, with a diminutive
dwelling, quiet as a lonely star. What blessed work road-making must be
in such places! It was with no little pleasure that, after fourteen
miles from Barber Creek, I saw a fine house on an eminence; and then the
town of Fincastle, spread out below us, on some rising grounds.

The scenes of the day left me little disposed for sociability in the
evening. We were kept waiting long for supper, by the arrival of a party
of New Yorkers; to avoid an introduction to whom, some of us pretended
to read, and some to be asleep, while others did our duty, talk. The
night closed in worthily. From the balcony of my chamber, I saw how
modestly the young moon eyed with me the region which will be spread
before her for ever, but which I was looking back upon for the last
time.

Here I must break off; and, instead of adding another description of the
Natural Bridge to the hundred which exist, bring into contrast with life
at the Virginia Springs, life in a New England farm-house.


Nothing can he quieter or more refreshing, after a winter's visiting at
Boston or New York, than such an abode in a country village as I made
trial of last May. The weeks slipped away only too fast. Dr. and Mrs.
F., their little boy, six years old, and myself, were fortunate enough
to prevail with a farmer's widow at Stockbridge, Massachusetts, to take
us into her house. The house was conspicuous from almost every part of
the sweet valley into which it looked; the valley of the Housatonic. It
was at the top of a steep hill; a sort of air palace. From our parlour
windows we could see all that went on in the village; and I often found
it difficult to take off my attention from this kind of spying. It was
tempting to trace the horseman's progress along the road, which wound
among the meadows, and over the bridge. It was tempting to watch the
neighbours going in and out, and the children playing in the courts, or
under the tall elms; all the people looking as small and busy as ants
upon a hillock. On week-days there was the ox-team in the field; and on
Sundays the gathering at the church-door. The larger of the two churches
stood in the middle of a green, with stalls behind it for the horses and
vehicles which brought the churchgoers from a distance. It was a pretty
sight to see them converging from every point in the valley, so that the
scene was all alive; and then disappear for the space of an hour and a
half, as if an earthquake had swallowed up all life; and then pour out
from the church door, and, after grouping on the green for a few
minutes, betake themselves homewards. Monument Mountain reared itself
opposite to us, with its thick woods, and here and there a grey crag
protruding. Other mountains closed in the valley, one of which treated
us for some nights with the spectacle of a spreading fire in its woods.
From the bases of these hills, up to our very door-step, there was one
bright carpet of green. Everything, houses, trees, churches, were
planted down into this green, so that there was no interruption but the
one road, and the blue mazy Housatonic. The softness of the scene, early
in a May morning, or when the sun was withdrawing, could not be
surpassed by anything seen under a Greek or Italian sky. Sometimes I
could scarcely believe it real: it looked air-painted, cloud-moulded.

It was as a favour that the widow Jones[8] took us in. She does not let
lodgings. She opened her house to us, and made us a part of her family.
Two of her daughters were at home, and a married son lived at hand. We
had a parlour, with three windows, commanding different views of the
valley: two good-sized chambers, conveniently furnished, and a large
closet between; our board with the family, and every convenience that
could be provided: and all for two dollars per week each, and half price
for the child. She was advised to ask more, but she refused, as she did
not wish to be "grasping." It was a merry afternoon when we followed the
wagon up the hill to our new abode, and unpacked, and settled ourselves
for our long-expected month of May. Never was unpacking a pleasanter
task.

The blossomy cherry-tree beside my chamber window was the first object I
saw in the morning when I threw up the sash; and beneath it was a broad
fallow, over which the blue jay flitted. By this window there was an
easy chair and a light table, a most luxurious arrangement for reading.
We breakfasted at half-past seven on excellent bread, potatoes, hung
beef, eggs, and strong tea. We admitted no visitors during the forenoon,
as our theory was that we were very busy people. Writing and reading did
occupy much of our time, but it was surprising how much was left for the
exercise of our tongues. Then there were visits to be made to the
post-office, and the crockery store, and the cobbler; and Charley found
occasion to burst in, a dozen times a-day, with a bunch of violets, or
news of the horse or cow, or of the ride he had had, or of the oxen in
the field.

We all dined together at two. One of the daughters absented herself at
breakfast, that she might arrange our rooms; but both were present at
dinner, dressed, and ready for their afternoon's occupation of working
and reading. One was fond of flowers, and had learned a great deal about
them. She was skilful in drying them, and could direct us to the places
in the woods and meadows where they grew. Some members of the family,
more literary than the rest, were gone westward; but there was a taste
for books among them all. I often saw a volume on the table of the
widow's parlour, with her spectacles in it. She told me, one day, of her
satisfaction in her children, that they were given to good pursuits, and
all received church members. All young people in these villages are more
or less instructed. Schooling is considered a necessary of life. I
happened to be looking over an old almanack one day, when I found, among
the directions relating to the preparations for winter on a farm, the
following: "Secure your cellars from frost. Fasten loose clap-boards and
shingles. Secure a good school-master." It seemed doubtful, at the first
glance, whether some new farming utensil had not been thus whimsically
named; as the brass plate which hooks upon the fender, or upper bar of
the grate, is called "the footman;" but the context clearly showed that
a man with learning in his head was the article required to be provided
before the winter. The only respect, as far as I know, in which we made
our kind hostess uneasy, was in our neglect of Charley's book-studies.
Charley's little head was full of knowledge of other kinds; but the
widow's children had all known more of the produce of the press at his
age than he; and she had a few anxious thoughts about him.

In the afternoon we rambled abroad, if the weather was fine; if rainy,
we lighted our wood fire, and pursued our employments of the morning,
not uncheered by a parting gleam from the west; a bar of bright yellow
sky above the hill tops, or a gush of golden light burnishing the dewy
valley at the last. Our walks were along the hill road to the lake, on
the way to Lenox, or through the farmyard and wood to a tumbling brook
in a small ravine. We tried all manner of experiments with moss, stones,
and twigs, among its sunny and shadowy reaches, and tiny falls. We
hunted up marsh flowers, wood anemones, and violets, and unfolded the
delicate ferns, still closely buttoned up, and waiting for the full
power of the summer sun. It was some trouble to me, in America, that I
could not get opportunity to walk so much as I think necessary to
health. It is not the custom there: partly owing to the climate, the
extreme heat of summer, and cold of winter; and partly to the absence of
convenient and pretty walks in and about the cities; a want which, I
trust, will be supplied in time. In Stockbridge much pedestrian exercise
may be and is accomplished; and I took the opportunity of indulging in
it, much to the surprise of some persons, who were not aware how English
ladies can walk. One very warm afternoon, we were going on a visit to
Lenox, five miles off. My friends went in a wagon; I preferred walking.
The widow's son watched me along the road, and then remarked, "You will
see no more of her till you get to Lenox. I would not walk off at that
rate, if they gave me Lenox when I got there."

In the evenings, we made a descent upon the village, or the village came
up to us. In the latter case, our hostess was always ready with a simple
and graceful welcome, and her best endeavours to provide seats for our
many friends. If we staid below till after nine, the family had gone to
rest on our return. We had only to lift the latch, light our candles,
and make our way to the milk-pans, if we were thirsty. For twenty-five
years, the widow has lived on the top of her hill, with only a latch to
her door. She sleeps undefended, for she has no enemies; and in her
village there are no thieves.

One night, when we were visiting some friends in the valley, it was
brought home to us what it is to live in a place where there are no
hackney coaches, or other travelling shelter. When we should have been
going home, it was a tremendous spring-storm; wind, thunder and
lightning, and rain in floods. We waited long; but it seemed to have no
intention of abating. When at length we did set out, we were a
remarkable looking troop; a gentlemanly young lawyer in a pea jacket;
the other gentlemen in the roughest coats that could be found; the
ladies leaving bonnets and caps behind, with handkerchiefs over their
heads, India-rubbers on their feet, their dresses tucked up, and cloaks
swathed round them. Our party were speeded up the hill by the fear that
Charley would be wakened and alarmed by the storm; but it was a
breathless sort of novelty to be working our way through one continued
pond to the foot of the hill, and then up the slippery ascent,
unbonneted, with the strangling gust in our faces, and no possibility of
our finding our way in the pitchy darkness but by the flashes of blue
lightning. Well clad as we were, we felt, I believe, something like
being paupers, or gentry of the highway, or some such houseless
personages exposed to the pelting of the pitiless storm. Charley was
found to be sound asleep, and we ourselves no worse off than being
steeped over the ankles.

The time came too soon when I must leave the beloved village, when I
must see no longer the morning baking and the evening milking; and the
soap cauldron boiling in the open air behind the house, with Charley
mounted on a log, peeping into it; and the reading and working, and
tying up of flowers in the afternoon. The time was come when the
motherly and sisterly kiss were ready for me, and my country life in New
England was at an end. It is well for us that our best pleasures have an
immortality like our own; that the unseen life is a glorification of the
seen. But for this, no one with a human heart would travel abroad, and
attach himself to scenes and persons which he cannot but love, but which
he must leave.

It was not always that the villagers of New England could place
themselves on hill tops, and leave their doors unfastened. There is a
striking contrast between their present security and the fears of their
forefathers, in the days when the nursling went to church, because it
was unsafe at home, in the absence of its father. Father, mother, and
children, all went on one horse to meet the total population within the
walls of the church; the one parent armed, the other prying about for
traces of the fearful red man. Those were the days when the English
regicides had fled to the colonies, and were there secreted. Those were
the days when anything that was to be made known to all was announced in
church, because everybody was sure to be there; and a fast-day was
ordained if anything very remarkable was to be done, or conveyed.
Sometimes formal announcements were made; sometimes intimations were so
interwoven with the texture of the discourse, as that unfriendly ears,
if such should be present, should not apprehend the meaning. When any
emissary of Charles the Second was prowling in search of a concealed
regicide, the pastor preached from some such text as, "Hide the
outcasts. Bewray not him that wandereth;"[9] and the flock understood
that they were to be on their guard against spies. Charles the Second
could never get hold of one of his enemies who had taken refuge in these
colonies.

On looking abroad over the valley of the Connecticut, from the top of
Mount Holyoke, I saw the village of Hadley, seated in the meadows, and
extending across a promontory, formed by the winding of the river. This
promontory afforded a secure grazing ground for the cattle by day, which
were driven by night into the area of the village, where the church
stood. Goffe, the regicide, was concealed for many years in the
parsonage at Hadley; all the people in the village, except two or three,
being, in this instance, unaware of an outcast being among them. One
Sunday, the Indians attacked the village while the people were all in
church. The women and children were left in the church, while their
husbands, fathers, and brothers went out to do battle with the cruel
foe. It went hard with the whites; the Indians were fast bearing them
down, when an unknown figure appeared in their ranks, with flowing
robes, streaming white hair, and a glittering sword. The cry was raised
that the angel Gabriel had been sent in answer to the prayers of the
women in the church. Every spirit was cheered, every arm was nerved, and
the Indians were beaten off, with great slaughter. Upon this, Gabriel
vanished; but tradition long preserved the memory of his miraculous
appearance. The very few who recognized in him Goffe, with his undressed
hair, and in his morning gown, kept the secret faithfully. How blessed a
change has come over rural life in Massachusetts since those days! Never
may its peace and security be invaded by those social abuses which are
more hateful than foreign spies; more cruel and treacherous than the
injured and exasperated red man of the wilderness!


The contrast is also striking between the country life of New England
and that of the west. I staid for some weeks in the house of a wealthy
land-owner in Kentucky. Our days were passed in great luxury; and some
of hottest of them very idly. The house was in the midst of grounds, gay
with verdure and flowers, in the opening month of June; and our
favourite seats were the steps of the hall, and chairs under the trees.
From thence we could watch the play of the children on the grass-plat,
and some of the drolleries of the little negroes. The red bird and the
blue bird flew close by; and the black and white woodpecker with crimson
head, tapped at all the tree-trunks, as if we were no interruption. We
relished the table fare, after that with which we had been obliged to
content ourselves on board the steam-boats. The tender meat, fresh
vegetables, good claret and champagne, with the daily piles of
strawberries and towers of ice-cream, were welcome luxuries. There were
thirty-three horses in the stables, and we roved about the neighbouring
country accordingly. There was more literature at hand than time to
profit by it. Books could be had at home; but not the woods of
Kentucky;--clear, sunny woods, with maple and sycamore springing up to a
height which makes man feel dwarfish. The glades, with their turf so
clean, every fallen leaf having been absorbed, reminded me of Ivanhoe, I
almost looked for Gurth in my rambles. All this was, not many years ago,
one vast canebrake, with a multitude of buffalo and deer: the pea-vine
spreading everywhere, and the fertility far greater than even now.

One morning I took a lesson in rifle-shooting; the gentlemen having
brought out their weapons for a few hours' sport among the squirrels. A
rifle does not bounce like a musket, and affords, therefore, an easy
beginning. I took aim at twenty-five paces, and hitting within an inch,
thought it best to leave off with credit. A child of eighteen months
stood in the middle of the gravel-walk, very composedly, while the
rifles were popping off; and his elder brothers were busy examining the
shots. Children seem born to their future pursuits, in new countries.
Negro children seem all born riders and drivers. It was an amusement to
see little children that in England could not hold themselves on a large
horse, playing pranks with a whole equipage that they were leading to
water.

In the afternoon of this day we took a long drive in search of buffalo;
the only herd of those hideous animals now to be seen in Kentucky. None
of the family liked to be left behind, so we filled the barouche and the
phaeton, and Master H., eight years old, in his garden costume, mounted
the mare, whose foal could not be induced to remain at home, and
frolicked beside us all the way. We rattled on through lanes, over open
ground above a pond, beneath locust groves, and beechen shades, seeing
herds of mules, and the finest of cattle within the verge of the woods.
The mules are raised for exportation to the fields of Louisiana. Then we
reached the hill-side where eight buffalo were grazing, four of the pure
and four of a mixed breed. The creatures stood looking at us as if they
had been turned into stone at the sight of us. Their sidelong gaze, as
they stood motionless beside a stump, or beneath a tree, was horrid. I
never saw an eye and attitude of which I should be so much afraid. As
they appeared to have no intention of moving a hair of their tails or
huge necks while we halted, a little slave, named Oliver, was sent up
the hill to put them in motion; there being no danger whatever in the
operation. Oliver disappeared, and no result of his exertions was
visible. When the buffalo and we had mutually stared for another five
minutes, Oliver's master called to him to know what he was about. He
replied that the buffalo looked too hard at him. At last, however, he
went near enough to put them in motion; and then they moved all at once,
each seeming more clumsy than the others in its headlong run. I am glad
to have seen buffalo, but there is nothing to be said for their beauty
or grace.

In the evening we repaired to the cool grass-plat, to amuse ourselves
with the pretty sport of trying which should find out the first star. It
was then ascertained that two gentlemen present were well qualified to
entertain us with stories of horrible western murders,--more fearful
than any other murders. So we sat till late at night, amidst summer
lightning and the glancing of fire-flies, listening to the most
harrowing and chilling set of tales of human misdeeds and their
retributions, that it ever was my fortune to listen to. The Christmas
firesides of England yield no impressions of horror like the plain facts
of a life in the wilderness, told under the trees, in a sultry night,
while the pale lightning is exploding on the horizon.

We had tidings of a camp-meeting to be held at some distance, the next
day. I had never seen a camp-meeting; but the notice was too short, and
the distance too great, and I missed the chance.

One of the slaves of a neighbouring gentleman came and asked his master
what he would give him for two bee-holes. "You are a pretty fellow,"
said his master, "to ask me to pay for my own trees." The negro urged
that his master would never have found out the bee-holes for himself;
which was very true. He was referred to his mistress; and it was finally
arranged that three of us English strangers should see the felling of a
bee-tree; a spectacle we had all heard of, but not seen. A large party
dined at this gentleman's house; and, presently after dinner, all set
out in carriages, or on horseback, for the spot in the woods where the
bee-tree stood. It was a shabby black walnut, which seemed scarcely fit
company for the noble array of trees around it. It was of so respectable
a circumference near the ground, however, and the negroes were making
such slow progress into its interior, that it was plain we should have
time for a drive in the woods before the catastrophe; so my host mounted
the box of our barouche, and we wound hither and thither under the
trees, over the rich grass; and, seldom having to stoop to avoid the
branches, catching bright glimpses of a hundred glades. It was a full
hour before the tree fell. We arrived just when it was chopped into the
middle, and some minutes before the event. It is a pretty sight to see
the top branches of the falling glory quiver, its canopy shake, and its
huge bulk come crashing down, while everybody runs away at the shout
which tells that it is coming. This tree fell on the wrong side, and
destroyed several yards of fence, snapping the stakes, and setting them
flying in all directions.

Straw and sulphur were burned in the hollow of the trunk. A few little
startled bees flew out, and wreaked their vengeance on our host and
myself; but most of them perished very quietly. I was asked whether I
should like to look into the cleft; and when I was stepping over the
bristling branches for the purpose, a bough was put into my hand, with
directions to wave it before me. I returned, stung, but having seen what
I wanted; and then I was told that if I had not waved a bough, I should
have escaped the bees. Mine was the common fate of persons who follow
unasked advice. Our host capered among the trees, with a bee or two
under his cravat and hair. It was impossible to help laughing. A stout
gentleman of the party did the same, under the mere idea of bees being
upon him; and, while tossing his head and arms about, he ran up, with a
great shock, against his own horse; on which sat a little negro,
grinning from ear to ear. The result of the whole was,--half a tumbler
glass full of blackened honey, and the high gratification of the
spectators, native and foreign, unharmed and stung.

Such is a fair specimen of our life in the West. Contrasts rise up
before my mind's eye, as the scenes of my journeying present themselves;
contrasts in the face of the country, as striking as in the modes of
living.


When I was at Salem, in Massachusetts, the friends whose hospitality I
was enjoying proposed an excursion to Cape Ann, (the northern point of
Massachusetts' bay,) and round the peninsula which constitutes the
township of Gloucester. This excursion impressed me strongly, from the
peculiar character of the scenery: but I know not whether it is an
impression which can be conveyed by description. Whether it be or not, I
would recommend all strangers to go and visit this peninsula; and, if
convenient, in fine autumn weather, when the atmosphere lends its best
aid to the characteristic charms of the landscape.

It was the 19th of October, a foggy morning, when we mounted the
carry-all,--a carriage which holds four,--and drove merrily out of
Salem, upon a carpet of fallen leaves. I love streets that have trees in
them; Summer Street in Boston; State Street in Albany; and Chesnut
Street in Salem. We passed through Beverley, where, as in most of the
small New England towns, the population has a character of its own. At
Marblehead, on the bay, near Salem, the people are noisy, restless,
high-spirited, and democratic. At Beverley, in the near neighbourhood,
they are quiet, economical, sober, and whig. Such, at least, is the
theory: and one fact in this connexion is, that the largest sums in the
Boston savings' banks are from Beverley. We passed over a long
bridge,--a respectable toll-bridge. The Americans are not fond of tolls
of above a certain age,--for fear of monopoly. There is a small bridge,
called Spite Bridge, because it spites the Beverley toll, which is much
used in preference. Seven miles further is Manchester;--how unlike the
English Manchester! A mere with pond-lilies! woods with the glorious
magnolia flourishing in the midst! This is the only place in New England
where the magnolia grows. In summer, parties are formed to visit the
woods; and children make much money as guides and gatherers.
Cabinet-making is the great business of the place. We saw logs of
mahogany lying outside the houses; and much furniture in pieces standing
up against the walls, ready to be packed for New Orleans. The furniture
of the southern cities is almost entirely derived from this
neighbourhood. One manufacturer, who makes the furniture here, and sells
it from his warehouse at New Orleans, has an income of 150,000 dollars.
The inhabitants of Manchester are very prosperous. The houses were all
good, except, here and there, the abode of a drunkard, known by its
unpainted walls, loose shingles, broken shutters, and decayed door-step,
in striking contrast with the neat white or yellow painted houses of the
neighbours, with their bright windows, and spruce Venetian blinds.

Seven miles further, stands Gloucester; the road to it winding among
wooded rocks; sometimes close down to the shore; and sometimes
overhanging the rippling waters of Massachusetts Bay. The gay autumn
copses harmonized well with the grey granite, out of which they seemed
to grow; and with the pearly sea, sinning out from beneath the
dissolving mist.

We crossed a little canal which opens into the bay, near Gloucester; and
hastened onto the most interesting ground we had to traverse, stopping
only a few minutes at Gloucester, to consult a map which indicated
almost every rock and house in the peninsula.

The population of the peninsula is homogeneous. There is probably no
individual beyond Gloucester whose parentage may not be referred to a
particular set of people, at a particular date in English history. It
has great wealth of granite and fish. It is composed of granite; and
almost its only visitors are fish.

It is a singular region. If a little orchard plot is seen, here and
there it seems rescued by some chance from being grown over with
granite. It was pleasant to see such a hollow, with its apple tree, the
ladder reared against it, the basket beneath, and the children picking
up the fallen fruit. The houses look as if they were squeezed in among
the rocks. The granite rises straight behind a house, encroaches on each
side, and overhangs the roof, leaving space only for a sprinkling of
grass about the door, for a red shrub or two to wave from a crevice, and
a drip of water to flow down among gay weeds. Room for these dwellings
is obtained by blasting the rocks. Formerly, people were frightened at
fragments falling through the roof after a blasting: but now, it has
become too common an occurrence to alarm any body. One precaution is
enforced: no one is allowed to keep more than twenty-eight pounds of
powder in one town or village; and the powder-houses may be seen,
insulated on rocks, and looking something like watch-boxes, at some
distance from every settlement. The school-houses are also remarkable
buildings. The school-house may always be known at a glance: a single
square room, generally painted white or pale green, and reared on a
grassy eminence, with a number of small heads to be seen through the
windows, or little people gathered about the door. There are twenty-one
school-houses in this township of Gloucester, the population of which is
nine thousand.

We dined at Sandy Bay, in a neat little hotel, whose windows bloomed
with chrysanthemums, nasturtium, and geraniums; and where we feasted on
chowder, an excellent dish when well cooked. It consists of fish, (in
this instance haddock,) stewed in milk, with potatoes. The parlour table
was graced with a fair collection of books; as was almost every parlour
I saw, throughout the country. Sandy Bay is a thriving place. It has a
pretty, and very conspicuous church, and a breakwater, built by the
people, at an expense of 40,000 dollars, but now too small for their
purposes. The Atlantic rolls in upon their coast fiercely in winter: and
the utility of a harbour hereabouts for all vessels, is a sufficient
ground for an application to Congress for an appropriation of 100,000
dollars, to make a larger breakwater. If the application has succeeded,
Sandy Bay will soon be an important place. While dinner was preparing,
we went down to the little harbour, and saw the dancing fishing-vessels,
the ranges and piles of mackarel barrels, and an immense display of the
fish drying. The mackarel fishery begins in June, and continues almost
through the year. There are three orders of mackarel, to which the
unfortunate individuals which are detained in their summer excursion
are assigned, according to their plumpness; one dollar per barrel being
the superiority of price of one over another.

After dinner, we proceeded on our travels, first visiting Cape Ann, the
extreme north end of Massachusetts Bay. We had the bay before us, and
the great Atlantic on our left. We ought to have seen Boston; but the
fog had not quite cleared away in the distance. Thatcher's Island was
near, with its two lighthouses, and a bright, green sea playing about
it. Then we turned and drove northward along the shore, with busy and
most picturesque quarries to our left. There were tall poles in the
quarries, with stretched ropes, the pulleys by which the blocks of stone
were raised: there were ox-teams and sleds: there were groups of workmen
in the recesses of the rocks, and beside the teams, and about the little
bays and creeks, where graceful sloops were riding under the lee of tiny
breakwaters, where the embarkation of the stone for foreign parts goes
on. Blocks of granite lay by the road-side, marked, either in reference
to its quality, if for sale; or to its proportion among the materials
which are being prepared to order for some great building in New York,
or Mobile, or New Orleans. Some may wonder how granite should be exposed
for sale in such a district; and who would be likely to buy it. I saw,
this afternoon, gate-posts, corner-posts, and foundations of common
houses, of undressed granite; and, also, an entire house, the abode of
the blacksmith. The friend who sat beside me told me that he hoped to
see many more such mechanics' dwellings before he dies. Stone becomes
cheaper, and wood dearer, continually; and there is no question which is
the more desirable material for those who can afford it. With regard to
beauty merely, I know of no building material to equal granite; dressed
in the city; undressed in the country. We went into a quarry, and saw an
untold wealth of fissured stone. The workmen contrive to pursue their
business even in the winter. When the snow is on the ground, and the
process of drilling is stopped, they remove ordinary pieces out of the
way, and make all clear for their spring labours. They "turn out"
250,000 dollars'-worth a-year; and the demand is perpetually on the
increase.

Along the north side of the peninsula the road was very pretty. The
grey, distant coast of New Hampshire bounded the sea view. Groups of
children were playing on the sands of a deep cove; and the farmers were
collecting or spreading their manure of sea-weed and fish-heads. Squam
river, which forms the peninsula, flowed out into the sea, and the
village of Annisquam spread along its bank. We crossed the bridge, close
by the only tide mill I ever saw. It works for six hours, and stops for
six, while the flow of the tide fills the pond above. The gates are then
shut, and a water-power is obtained till the tide again flows.

We saw what we could of Gloucester, on our return to that little town,
before sunset. There are some very good houses, newly-built; and the
place has the air of prosperity that gladdens the eye wherever it turns,
in New England. We ran down to the shore. It is overlooked by a
windmill, from whose grassy platform we beheld the scene in the singular
light which here succeeds an autumn sunset. The sky and sea were,
without exaggeration, of a deep scarlet: Ten Pound Island sat black upon
the waters, with its yellow beacon just lighted. Fishing vessels lay
still, every rope being reflected in the red mirror; and a boat, in
which a boy was sculling across the harbour, was the only moving object.

After tea, a clergyman and his wife called; and then a long succession
of the hospitable inhabitants of Gloucester came to bid us welcome: from
which it appeared that small articles of intelligence circulate as
rapidly here as in other country-places. In another respect, Gloucester
resembled all the villages and small towns I passed through: in the
pretty attention of presenting flowers. In some of the larger cities,
bouquets of rich and rare flowers were sent to me, however severe might
have been the frost, or however dreary the season. In the smallest
villages, I had offerings, quite as welcome, in bunches of flowers from
the woods and meadows. Many of these last were new to me, and as gladly
received as the luscious hyacinths which greeted me every morning at
Charleston. At Lenox, in Massachusetts, where I spent one night, my
table was covered with meadow-flowers, and with fine specimens of
Jack-in-the-pulpit, and the moccassin-flower, or lady's slipper: and at
Gloucester, when I returned from my early visit to the beach, where I
had been to see the fishermen go out, I found a gorgeous bouquet of
autumn flowers; dahlias more various and rich than could have been
supposed to grow in such a region.

On our return to Salem, we diverged a little from our road, near
Manchester, to see a farm, whose situation would make an envious person
miserable. The house lies under the shelter of a wooded hill, and enjoys
a glorious view of Massachusetts Bay. The property lies between two
bays, and has a fine fishing-station off the point. The fields look
fertile, and a wide range of pasturage skirts the bay. A woman and
children were busy in the orchard, with a cart and barrels, taking in a
fine crop of apples; and we could only hope that they were sensible of
their privilege in living in such a place. These are the region,
teeming with the virtues of the Pilgrims, and as yet uninfected by the
mercenary and political cowardice of the cities, where the most
gladdening aspects of human life are to be seen.


The newly-settled districts of the southern States are as unlike as
possible to all this. They are extreme opposite cases. If human life
presents its fairest aspects in the retired townships of New
England,--some of its very worst, perhaps, are seen in the raw
settlements of Alabama and Mississippi.

When we drew near to Columbus, Georgia, we were struck with amazement at
the stories that were told, and the anecdotes that were dropped, in the
stage, about recent attempts on human life in the neighbourhood; and at
the number of incidents of the same kind which were the news of the day
along the road. Our driver from Macon had been shot at, in attempting to
carry off a young lady. A gentleman, boarding in the hotel at Columbus,
was shot in the back, in the street, and laid by for months. No inquiry
was made, or nothing came of it. The then present governor of the State
of Mississippi had recently stood over two combatants, pistol in hand,
to see fair play. This _was_ stated as a remarkable fact. The landlord
of the house where we stopped to breakfast on the day we were to reach
Columbus, April 9th, 1835, was, besides keeping a house of
entertainment, a captain of militia, and a member of the legislature of
Georgia. He was talking over with his guests a late case of homicide in
a feud between the Myers and Macklimore families. He declared that he
would have laws like those of the Medes and Persians against homicide;
and, in the same breath, said that if he were a Myers, he would shoot
Mr. Macklimore and all his sons.

We arrived at Columbus before sunset, and determined to stay a day to
see how the place had got on since Captain Hall saw it cut out of the
woods, ten years before. During the evening, I could do nothing but
watch the Indians from my window. The place swarmed with them; a few
Choctaws, and the rest Creeks. A sad havoc has taken place among them
since; and this neighbourhood has been made the scene of a short but
fierce war. But all looked fair and friendly when we were there. Groups
of Indians were crouching about the entries of the stores, or looking in
at the windows. The squaws went by, walking one behind another, with
their hair, growing low on the forehead, loose, or tied at the back of
the head, forming a fine contrast with the young lady who had presided
at our breakfast-table at five that morning, with her long hair braided
and adorned with brilliant combs, while her fingers shone in pearl and
gold rings. These squaws carried large Indian baskets on their backs,
and shuffled along, bare-footed, while their lords paced before them,
well mounted; or, if walking, gay with blue and red clothing and
embroidered leggings, with tufts of hair at the knees, while pouches and
white fringes dangled about them. They looked like grave merry-andrews;
or, more still, like solemn fanatical harvest men going out for largess.
By eight o'clock they had all disappeared; but the streets were full of
them again the next morning.

Our hostess was civil, and made no difficulty about giving us a late
breakfast by ourselves, in consideration of our fatigues. Before one
o'clock we dined, in company with seventy-five persons, at one long
table. The provisions were good, but ill-cooked; and the knives so blunt
that it was a mystery to me how the rest of the company obtained so
quick a succession of mouthfuls as they did.

The Chattahoochee, on whose banks Columbus stands, is unlike any river
I saw in the United States, unless it be some parts of the Susquehanna.
Its rapids, overhung by beech and pine woods, keep up a perpetual
melody, grateful alike to the ear of the white and the red man. It is
broad and full, whirling over and around the rocks with which it is
studded, and under the frail wooden foot-bridge which spans a portion of
its width, between the shore and a pile of rocks in the middle of the
channel. On this foot-bridge I stood, and saw a fish caught in a net
laid among the eddies. A dark fisherman stood on each little promontory;
and a group was assembled about some canoes in a creek on the opposite
Alabama shore, where the steepness of the hills seemed scarcely to allow
a foothold between the rushing water and the ascent. The river is
spanned by a long covered bridge, which we crossed the same night on our
way into Alabama.

There are three principal streets in Columbus, with many smaller,
branching out into the forest. Some pretty bits of greensward are left,
here and there, with a church, or a detached house upon
each--village-like. There are some good houses, five hotels, and a
population of above 2,000,--as nearly as I could make out among the
different accounts of the accession of inhabitants since the census. The
stores looked creditably stocked; and a great many gentlemanly men were
to be seen in the streets. It bears the appearance of being a thriving,
spacious, handsome village, well worth stopping to see.

We left it, at seven in the evening, by the long bridge, at the other
end of which we stopped for the driver to hold a parley, about a parcel,
with a woman, who spoke almost altogether in oaths. A gentleman in the
stage remarked, that we must have got quite to the end of the world.
The roads were as bad as roads could be; and we rolled from side to side
so incessantly, as to obviate all chance of sleeping. The passengers
were very patient during the hours of darkness; but, after daylight,
they seemed to think they had been long enough employed in shifting
their weight to keep the coach on its four wheels. "I say, driver,"
cried one, "you won't upset us, now daylight is come?" "Driver," shouted
another, "keep this side up." "Gentlemen," replied the driver, "I shall
mind nothing you say till the ladies begin to complain." A reply equally
politic and gallant.

At half past five, we stopped to breakfast at a log dwelling, composed
of two rooms, with an open passage between. We asked for water and
towel. There was neither basin nor towel; but a shallow tin dish of
water was served up in the open passage where all our fellow-travellers
were standing. We asked leave to carry our dish into the right-hand
room. The family were not all dressed. Into the left-hand room. A lady
lodged there!

We travelled till sunset through the Creek Territory, the roads
continuing to be extremely bad. The woods were superb in their spring
beauty. The thickets were in full leaf; and the ground was gay with
violets, may-apple, buck-eye, blue lupin, iris, and crow-poison. The
last is like the white lily, growing close to the ground. Its root,
boiled, mixed with corn, and thrown out into the fields, poisons crows.
If eaten by cattle, it injures but does not destroy them. The sour-wood
is a beautiful shrub. To-day it looked like a splendid white fuchsia,
with tassels of black butterflies hanging from the extremities of the
twigs. But the grandest flower of all, perhaps the most exquisite I ever
beheld, is the honeysuckle of the southern woods. It bears little
resemblance to the ragged flower which has the same name elsewhere. It
is a globe of blossoms, larger than my hand, growing firmly at the end
of an upright stalk, with the richest and most harmonious colouring, the
most delicate long anthers, and the flowers exquisitely grouped among
the leaves. It is the queen of flowers. I generally contrived, in my
journeys through the southern States, to have a bunch of honeysuckles in
the stage before my eyes; and they seemed to be visible wherever I
turned, springing from the roots of the forest trees, or dangling from
their topmost boughs, or mixing in with the various greens of the
thickets.

We saw to-day, the common sight of companies of slaves travelling
westwards; and the very uncommon one of a party returning into South
Carolina. When we overtook such a company proceeding westwards, and
asked where they were going, the answer commonly given by the slaves
was, "Into Yellibama."--Sometimes these poor creatures were encamped
under the care of the slave-trader, on the banks of a clear stream, to
spend a day in washing their clothes. Sometimes they were loitering
along the road; the old folks and infants mounted on the top of a
wagon-load of luggage; the able-bodied, on foot, perhaps silent, perhaps
laughing; the prettier of the girls, perhaps with a flower in the hair,
and a lover's arm around her shoulder. There were wide differences in
the air and gait of these people. It is usual to call the most depressed
of them brutish in appearance. In some sense they are so; but I never
saw in any brute an expression of countenance so low, so lost, as in the
most degraded class of negroes. There is some life and intelligence in
the countenance of every animal; even in that of "the silly sheep,"
nothing so dead as the vacant, unheeding look of the depressed slave is
to be seen. To-day, there was a spectacle by the roadside which showed
that this has nothing to do with negro nature; though no such proof is
needed by those who have seen negroes in favourable circumstances, and
know how pleasant an aspect those grotesque features may wear. To-day we
passed, in the Creek Territory, an establishment of Indians who held
slaves. Negroes are anxious to be sold to Indians, who give them
moderate work, and accommodations as good as their own. Those seen
to-day among the Indians, were sleek, intelligent, and cheerful-looking,
like the most favoured house-slaves, or free servants of colour, where
the prejudice is least strong.

We were on the look-out for Indians, all the way through this Creek
Territory. Some on horseback gave us a grave glance as we passed. Some
individuals were to be seen in the shadow of the forest, leaning against
a tree or a fence. One lay asleep by the roadside, overcome with
"whiskey too much," as they style intoxication. They are so intent on
having their full bargain of whiskey, that they turn their bottle upside
down, when it has been filled to the cork, to have the hollow at the
bottom filled. The piazza at the post-office was full of solemn Indians.
Miserable-looking squaws were about the dwellings, with their naked
children, who were gobbling up their supper of hominy from a wooden
bowl.

We left the Creek Territory just as the full moon rose, and hoped to
reach Montgomery by two hours before midnight. We presently began to
ascend a long hill; and the gentlemen passengers got out, according to
custom, to walk up the rising ground. In two minutes, the driver
stopped, and came to tell us ladies that he was sorry to trouble us to
get out; but that an emigrant's wagon had blocked up the ford of a creek
which we had to cross; and he feared we might be wetted if we remained
in the stage while he took it through a deeper part. A gentleman was
waiting, he said, to hand us over the log which was to be our bridge.
This gentleman, I believe, was the emigrant himself. I made for what
seemed to me the end of the log; but was deceived by the treacherous
moonlight, which made wood, ground, and water, look all one colour. I
plunged up to the waist into the creek; and, when I was out again, could
hardly keep upon the log for laughing. There was time, before we
overtook the rest of the party, to provide against my taking cold; and
there remained only the ridiculous image of my deliberate walk into the
water.

It must not be supposed a common circumstance that an emigrant's wagon
was left in a creek. The "camping out" is usually done in a sheltered,
dry spot in the woods, not far from some little stream, where the kettle
may be filled, and where the dusty children may be washed. Sleepy as I
might be, in our night journeys, I was ever awake to this picture, and
never tired of contemplating it. A dun haze would first appear through
the darkness; and then gleams of light across the road. Then the whole
scene opened. If earlier than ten at night, the fire would be blazing,
the pot boiling, the shadowy horses behind, at rest, the groups fixed in
their attitudes to gaze at us, whether they were stretching their
sailcloth on poles to windward, or drawing up the carts in line, or
gathering sticks, or cooking. While watching us, they little thought
what a picture they themselves made. If after midnight, the huge fire
was flickering and smouldering; figures were seen crouching under the
sailcloth, or a head or two was lifted up in the wagon. A solitary
figure was seen in relief against the fire; the watch, standing to keep
himself awake; or, if greeted by our driver, thrusting a pine slip into
the fire, and approaching with his blazing torch to ask or to give
information. In the morning, the places where such encampments have
been cannot be mistaken. There is a clear, trodden space, strewed with
chips and refuse food, with the bare poles which had supported the
sailcloth, standing in the midst, and a scorched spot where the fire had
been kindled. Others, besides emigrants, camp out in the woods. Farmers,
on their way to a distant market, find it cheaper to bring food, and
trust otherwise to the hospitality of dame Nature, than to put up at
hotels. Between the one and the other, we were amply treated with the
untiring spectacle.

We had bespoken accommodations for the night at the hotel at Montgomery,
by a friend who had preceded us. On our arrival at past eleven o'clock,
we found we were expected; but no one would have guessed it. In my
chamber, there was neither water, nor sheets, nor anything that afforded
a prospect of my getting to rest, wet as my clothes were. We were
hungry, and tired, and cold; and there was no one to help us but a
slave, who set about her work as slaves do. We ate some biscuits that we
had with us, and gave orders, and made requests with so much success as
to have the room in tolerable order by an hour after midnight. When I
awoke in the morning, the first thing I saw was, that two mice were
running after one another round my trunk, and that the floor of the room
seemed to contain the dust of a twelvemonth. The breakfast was to atone
for all. The hostess and another lady, three children, and an array of
slaves, placed themselves so as to see us eat our breakfast; but it
seemed to me that the contents of the table were more wonderful to look
at than ourselves. Besides the tea and coffee, there were corn bread,
buns, buck-wheat cakes, broiled chicken, bacon, eggs, rice, hominy,
fish, fresh and pickled, and beef-steak. The hostess strove to make us
feel at home, and recommended her plentiful meal by her hearty welcome
to it. She was anxious to explain that her house was soon to be in
better order. Her husband was going to Mobile to buy furniture; and,
just now, all was in confusion, from her head slave having swallowed a
fish bone, and being unable to look after the affairs of the house. When
our friends came to carry us to their plantation, she sent in
refreshments, and made herself one of the party, in all heartiness.

It was Sunday, and we went to the Methodist church, hoping to hear the
regular pastor, who is a highly-esteemed preacher. But a stranger was in
the pulpit, who gave us an extraordinary piece of doctrine, propounded
with all possible vehemence. His text was the passage about the tower of
Siloam; and his doctrine was that great sinners would somehow die a
violent death. Perhaps this might be thought a useful proposition in a
town where life is held so cheap as in Montgomery; but we could not
exactly understand how it was derived from the text. The place was
intensely light and hot, there being no blinds to the windows, on each
side of the pulpit: and the quietness of the children was not to be
boasted of.

On the way to our friends' plantation, we passed a party of negroes,
enjoying their Sunday drive. They never appear better than on such
occasions, as they all ride and drive well, and are very gallant to
their ladies. We passed a small prairie, the first we had seen; and very
serene and pretty it looked, after the forest. It was green and
undulating, with a fringe of trees.

Our friends, now residing seven miles from Montgomery, were from South
Carolina; and the lady, at least, does not relish living in Alabama. It
was delightful to me to be a guest in such an abode as theirs. They were
about to build a good house: meantime, they were in one which I liked
exceedingly: a log-house, with the usual open passage in the middle.
Roses and honeysuckles, to which humming-birds resort, grew before the
door. Abundance of books, and handsome furniture and plate, were within
the house, while daylight was to be seen through its walls. In my well
furnished chamber, I could see the stars through the chinks between the
logs. During the summer, I should be sorry to change this primitive kind
of abode for a better.

It is not difficult to procure the necessaries and comforts of life.
Most articles of food are provided on the plantation. Wine and groceries
are obtained from Mobile or New Orleans; and clothing and furniture from
the north. Tea is twenty shillings English per lb.; brown sugar,
threepence-halfpenny; white sugar, sixpence-halfpenny. A gentleman's
family, where there are children to be educated, cannot live for less
than from seven hundred pounds to one thousand pounds per annum. The
sons take land and buy slaves very early; and the daughters marry almost
in childhood; so that education is less thought of, and sooner ended,
than in almost any part of the world. The pioneers of civilisation, as
the settlers in these new districts may be regarded, care for other
things more than for education; or they would not come. They are, from
whatever motive, money-getters; and few but money-getting qualifications
are to be looked for in them. It was partly amusing, and partly sad, to
observe the young people of these regions; some, fit for a better mode
of life, discontented; some youths pedantic, some maidens romantic, to a
degree which makes the stranger almost doubt the reality of the scenes
and personages before his eyes. The few better educated who come to get
money, see the absurdity, and feel the wearisomeness of this kind of
literary cultivation; but the being in such society is the tax they
must pay for making haste to be rich.

I heard in Montgomery of a wealthy old planter in the neighbourhood, who
has amassed millions of dollars, while his children can scarcely write
their names. Becoming aware of their deficiencies, as the place began to
be peopled from the eastward, he sent a son of sixteen to school, and a
younger one to college; but they proved "such gawks," that they were
unable to learn, or even to remain in the society of others who were
learning; and their old father has bought land in Missouri, whither he
was about to take his children, to remove them from the contempt of
their neighbours. They are doomed to the lowest office of social beings;
to be the mechanical, unintelligent pioneers of man in the wilderness.
Surely such a warning as this should strike awe into the whole region,
lest they should also perish to all the best purposes of life, by
getting to consider money, not as a means, but an end.

I suppose there must be such pioneers; but the result is a society which
it is a punishment to its best members to live in. There is pedantry in
those who read; prejudice in those who do not; coxcombry among the young
gentlemen; bad manners among the young ladies; and an absence of all
reference to the higher, the real objects of life. When to all this is
added that tremendous curse, the possession of irresponsible power,
(over slaves,) it is easy to see how character must become, in such
regions, what it was described to me on the spot, "composed of the
chivalric elements, badly combined:" and the wise will feel that, though
a man _may_ save his soul anywhere, it is better to live on bread and
water where existence is most idealized, than to grow suddenly rich in
the gorgeous regions where mind is corrupted or starved amidst the
luxuriance of nature. The hard-working settler of the north-west, who
hews his way into independence with his own hands, is, or may be, exempt
from the curse of this mental corruption or starvation; but it falls
inevitably and heavily upon those who fatten upon the bounty of Nature,
in the society of money-getters like themselves, and through the labours
of degraded fellow-men, whom they hold in their injurious power.

We saw several plantations while we were in this neighbourhood. Nothing
can be richer than the soil of one to which we went, to take a lesson in
cotton-growing. It will never want more than to have the cotton seed
returned to it. We saw the plough, which is very shallow. Two throw up a
ridge, which is wrought by hand into little mounds. After these are
drilled, the seed is put in by hand. This plantation consists of nine
hundred and fifty acres, and is flourishing in every way. The air is
healthy, as the situation is high prairie land. The water is generally
good; but, after rain, so impregnated with lime, as to be disagreeable
to the smell and taste. Another grievance is, a weed which grows on the
prairie, which the cows like in summer, but which makes the milk so
disagreeable, that cream, half-an-inch thick, is thrown to the pigs.
They only can estimate this evil who know what the refreshment of milk
is in hot climates. Another grievance is, that no trees can be allowed
to grow near the house, for fear of the mosquitoes. Everything else is
done for coolness; there are wide piazzas on both sides of the house;
the rooms are lofty, and amply provided with green blinds; but all this
does not compensate to the eye for the want of the shade of trees. The
bareness of the villages of the south is very striking to the eye of a
stranger, as he approaches them. They lie scorching and glaring on the
rising grounds, or on the plain, hazy with the heat, while the forest,
with its myriads of trees, its depth of shade, is on the horizon. But
the plague of mosquitoes is a sufficient warrant for any sacrifice of
the pleasures of the eye; for they allow but little enjoyment of
anything in their presence.

On this, and many other estates that we saw, the ladies make it their
business to cut out all the clothes for the negroes. Many a fair pair of
hands have I seen dyed with blue, and bearing the marks of the large
scissars. The slave women cannot be taught, it is said, to cut out even
their scanty and unshapely garments economically. Nothing can be more
hideous than their working costume. There would be nothing to lose on
the score of beauty, and probably much gained, if they could be
permitted to clothe themselves. But it is universally said that they
cannot learn. A few ladies keep a woman for this purpose, very naturally
disliking the coarse employment.

We visited the negro quarter; a part of the estate which filled me with
disgust, wherever I went. It is something between a haunt of monkeys and
a dwelling-place of human beings. The natural good taste, so remarkable
in free negroes, is here extinguished. Their small, dingy, untidy
houses, their cribs, the children crouching round the fire, the animal
deportment of the grown-up, the brutish chagrins and enjoyments of the
old, were all loathsome. There was some relief in seeing the children
playing in the sun, and sometimes fowls clucking and strutting round the
houses; but otherwise, a walk through a lunatic asylum is far less
painful than a visit to the slave quarter of an estate. The children are
left, during working hours, in the charge of a woman; and they are
bright, and brisk, and merry enough, for the season, however slow and
stupid they may be destined to become.

My next visit was to a school--the Franklin Institute, in Montgomery,
established by a gentleman who has bestowed unwearied pains on its
organization, and to whose care it does great credit. On our approach,
we saw five horses walking about the enclosure, and five saddles hung
over the fence: a true sign that some of the pupils came from a
distance. The school was hung with prints; there was a collection of
shells; many books and maps; and some philosophical apparatus. The boys,
and a few girls, were steadily employed over their books and mapping;
and nothing could exceed the order and neatness of the place. If the
event corresponds with the appearance, the proprietor must be one of the
most useful citizens the place has yet been honoured with.

I spent some days at a plantation a few miles from Montgomery, and heard
there of an old lady who treats her slaves in a way very unusual, but
quite safe, as far as appears. She gives them knowledge, which is
against the law; but the law leaves her in peace and quiet. She also
commits to them the entire management of the estate, requiring only that
they should make her comfortable, and letting them take the rest. There
is an obligation by law to keep an overseer; to obviate insurrection.
How she manages about this, I omitted to inquire: but all goes on well;
the cultivation of the estate is creditable, and all parties are
contented. This is only a temporary ease and contentment. The old lady
must die; and her slaves will either be sold to a new owner, whose
temper will be an accident; or, if freed, must leave the State: but the
story is satisfactory in as far as it gives evidence of the
trust-worthiness of the negroes.

Our drives about the plantation and neighbouring country were delicious.
The inundations from the rivers are remarkable; a perfect Eden appears
when they subside. At the landing place of this plantation, I saw a
board nailed near the top of a lofty tree, and asked what it could be
for. It was the high-water mark. The river, the Alabama, was now upwards
of twenty feet higher than usual; and logs, corn-stalks, and green
boughs were being carried down its rapid current, as often as we went to
the shore. There were evidences of its having laid even houses under
water; but, on its subsiding, it would be found to have left a deposit
of two inches and a half of fine new soil on the fields on either side
of its channel. I never stood on the banks of the southern rivers
without being reminded of Daniell's Views in India and Ceylon: the water
level, shadowy and still, and the thickets actually springing out of it,
with dark-green recesses, with the relief of a slender white stem, or
dangling creeper here and there. Some creepers rise like a ladder,
straight from the water to a bough one hundred and twenty feet high. As
for the softness of the evening light on the water, it is indescribable.
It is as if the atmosphere were purified from all mortal breathings, it
is so bright, and yet not dazzling; there is such a profusion of
verdure.

There were black women ploughing in the field, with their ugly, scanty,
dingy dresses, their walloping gait, and vacant countenance. There were
scarlet and blue birds flitting over the dark fallows. There was
persimon sprouting in the woods, and the young corn-plants in the field,
with a handful of cotton-seed laid round each sprout. There was a view
from a bluff which fully equalled all my expectations of what the
scenery of the southern States would be; yet, tropical as it was in many
respects, it reminded me strongly of the view from Richmond Hill. We
were standing on the verge of a precipice, of a height which I dare not
specify. A deep fissure to our right was spanned by a log which it made
one shudder to think of crossing. Behind us lay a cotton-field of 7,000
acres within one fence. All this, and the young aloes, and wild vines,
were little enough like Richmond; and so was the faint blue line of
hills on the horizon; but it was the intervening plain, through which
the river ran, and on which an infinite variety of noble trees grew, as
it appeared, to an interminable distance. Here their tops seemed woven
into compactness; there they were so sprinkled as to display the majesty
and grace of their forms. I looked upon this as a glorification of the
Richmond view.

It was now the middle of April. In the kitchen garden the peas were
ripening, and the strawberries turning red, though the spring of 1835
was very backward. We had salads, young asparagus, and radishes.

The following may be considered a pretty fair account of the provision
for a planter's table, at this season; and, except with regard to
vegetables, I believe it does not vary much throughout the year.
Breakfast at seven; hot wheat bread, generally sour; corn bread,
biscuits, waffles, hominy, dozens of eggs, broiled ham, beef-steak or
broiled fowl, tea and coffee. Lunch at eleven; cake and wine, or
liqueur. Dinner at two; now and then soup (not good,) always roast
turkey and ham; a boiled fowl here, a tongue there; a small piece of
nondescript meat, which generally turns out to be pork disguised;
hominy, rice, hot corn-bread, sweet potatoes; potatoes mashed with
spice, very hot; salad and radishes, and an extraordinary variety of
pickles. Of these, you are asked to eat everything with everything else.
If you have turkey and ham on your plate, you are requested to add
tongue, pork, hominy, and pickles. Then succeed pies of apple, squash,
and pumpkin; custard, and a variety of preserves as extraordinary as the
preceding pickles: pine-apple, peach, limes, ginger, guava jelly,
cocoa-nut, and every sort of plums. These are almost all from the
West-Indies. Dispersed about the table are shell almonds, raisins,
hickory, and other nuts; and, to crown the whole, large blocks of
ice-cream. Champagne is abundant, and cider frequent. Ale and porter may
now and then be seen; but claret is the most common drink. During dinner
a slave stands at a corner of the table, keeping off the flies by waving
a large bunch of peacock's feathers fastened into a handle,--an ampler
fan than those of our grandmothers.

Supper takes place at six, or seven. Sometimes the family sits round the
table; but more commonly the tray is handed round, with plates which
must be held in the lap. Then follow tea and coffee, waffles, biscuits,
sliced ham or hung-beef, and sweet cake. Last of all, is the offer of
cake and wine at nine or ten.

The profits of cotton-growing, when I was in Alabama, were thirty-five
per cent. One planter whom I knew had bought fifteen thousand dollars'
worth of land within two years, which he could then have sold for
sixty-five thousand dollars. He expected to make, that season, fifty or
sixty thousand dollars of his growing crop. It is certainly the place to
become rich in; but the state of society is fearful. One of my hosts, a
man of great good-nature, as he shows in the treatment of his slaves,
and in his family relations, had been stabbed in the back in the
reading-room of the town, two years before, and no prosecution was
instituted. Another of my hosts carried loaded pistols for a fortnight,
just before I arrived, knowing that he was lain in wait for by persons
against whose illegal practices he had given information to a
magistrate, whose carriage was therefore broken in pieces, and thrown
into the river. A lawyer with whom we were in company one afternoon, was
sent for to take the deposition of a dying man who had been sitting with
his family in the shade, when he received three balls in the back from
three men who took aim at him from behind trees. The tales of
jail-breaking and rescue were numberless; and a lady of Montgomery told
me that she had lived there four years, during which time no day, she
believed, had passed without some one's life having been attempted,
either by duelling or assassination. It will be understood that I
describe this region as presenting an extreme case of the material
advantages and moral evils of a new settlement, under the institution of
slavery. The most prominent relief is the hospitality,--that virtue of
young society. It is so remarkable, and to the stranger so grateful,
that there is danger of its blinding him to the real state of affairs.
In the drawing-room, the piazza, the barouche, all is so gay and
friendly, there is such a prevailing hilarity and kindness, that it
seems positively ungrateful and unjust to pronounce, even in one's own
heart, that all this way of life is full of wrong and peril. Yet it is
impossible to sit down to reflect, with every order of human beings
filling an equal space before one's mental eye, without being struck to
the soul with the conviction that the state of society, and no less of
individual families, is false and hollow, whether their members are
aware of it or not; that they forget that they must be just before they
can be generous. The severity of this truth is much softened to
sympathetic persons on the spot; but it returns with awful force when
they look back upon it from afar.

In the slave quarter of a plantation hereabouts I saw a poor wretch who
had run away three times, and been re-captured. The last time he was
found in the woods, with both legs frost-bitten above the knees, so as
to render amputation necessary. I passed by when he was sitting on the
door-step of his hut, and longed to see him breathe his last. But he is
a young man, likely to drag out his helpless and hopeless existence for
many a dreary year. I dread to tell the rest; but such things must be
told sometimes, to show to what a pass of fiendish cruelty the human
spirit may be brought by merely witnessing the exercise of irresponsible
power over the defenceless. I give the very words of the speaker,
premising that she is not American by birth or education, nor yet
English.

The master and mistress of this poor slave, with their children, had
always treated him and his fellow-slaves very kindly. He made no
complaint of them. It was not from their cruelty that he attempted to
escape. His running away was therefore a mystery to the person to whom I
have alluded. She recapitulated all the clothes that had been given to
him; and all the indulgences, and forgivenesses for his ingratitude in
running away from such a master, with which he had been blessed. She
told me that she had advised his master and mistress to refuse him
clothes, when he had torn his old ones with trying to make his way
through the woods; but his master had been too kind, and had again
covered his nakedness. She turned round upon me, and asked what could
make the ungrateful wretch run away a third time from such a master?

"He wanted to be free."

"Free! from such a master!"

"From any master."

"The villain! I went to him when he had had his legs cut off, and I said
to him, it serves you right...."

"What! when you knew he could not run away any more?"

"Yes, that I did; I said to him, you wretch! but for your master's sake
I am glad it has happened to you. You deserve it, that you do. If I were
your master I would let you die; I'd give you no help nor nursing. It
serves you right; it is just what you deserve. It's fit that it should
happen to you ...!"

"You did not--you dared not so insult the miserable creature!" I cried.

"Oh, who knows," replied she, "but that the Lord may bless a word of
grace in season!"

Some readers may conceive this to be a freak of idiotcy. It was not so.
This person is shrewd and sensible in matters where rights and duties
are not in question. Of these she is, as it appears, profoundly
ignorant; in a state of superinduced darkness; but her character is that
of a clever, and, with some, a profoundly religious woman. Happily, she
has no slaves of her own: at least, no black ones.

I saw this day, driving a wagon, a man who is a schoolmaster, lawyer,
almanack-maker, speculator in old iron, and dealer in eggs, in addition
to a few other occupations. His must be a very active existence.

This little history of a portion of my southern journey may give an idea
of what life is in the wilder districts of the south. I will offer but
one more sketch, and that will exemplify life in the wilder districts of
the north. The picture of my travels in and around Michigan will convey
the real state of things there, at present.

Our travelling party consisted of Mr. and Mrs. L., the before-mentioned
Charley, his father and mother, and myself. We were prepared to see
everything to advantage; for there was strong friendship among us all;
and a very unusual agreement of opinion on subjects which education,
temperament, or the circumstances of the time, made most interesting to
us. The great ornament of the party--our prince of Denmark--was Charley;
a boy of uncommon beauty and promise, and fully worthy of the character
given him by one of our drivers, with whom the boy had ingratiated
himself by his chatter on the box;--"An eternal smart boy, and the
greatest hand at talk I ever came across."

We landed at Detroit, from Lake Erie, at seven o'clock in the morning of
the 13th of June, 1836. We reached the American just in time for
breakfast. At that long table, I had the pleasure of seeing the
healthiest set of faces that I had beheld since I left England. The
breakfast was excellent, and we were served with much consideration; but
the place was so full, and the accommodations of Detroit are so
insufficient for the influx of people who are betaking themselves
thither, that strangers must patiently put up with much delay and
inconvenience till new houses of entertainment are opened. We had to
wait till near one o'clock before any of us could have a room in which
to dress; but I had many letters to write, and could wait; and before I
had done, Charley came with his shining face and clean collar, to show
me that accommodation had been provided. In the afternoon, we saw what
we could of the place, and walked by the side of the full and tranquil
river St. Clair. The streets of the town are wide and airy; but the
houses, churches, and stores, are poor for the capital city of a
Territory or State. This is a defect which is presently cured, in the
stirring northern regions of the United States. Wooden planks, laid on
the grass, form the pavement, in all the outskirts of the place. The
deficiency is of stone, not of labour. Thousands of settlers are
pouring in every year; and of these, many are Irish, Germans, or Dutch,
working their way into the back country, and glad to be employed for a
while at Detroit, to earn money to carry them further. Paving-stones
will be imported here, I suppose, as I saw them at New Orleans, to the
great improvement of the health and comfort of the place. The block-wood
pavement, of which trial has been made in a part of Broadway, New York,
is thought likely to answer better at Detroit than any other kind, and
is going to be tried.

The country round Detroit is as flat as can be imagined; and, indeed, it
is said that the highest mountain in the State boasts only sixty feet of
elevation. A lady of Detroit once declared, that if she were to build a
house in Michigan, she would build a hill first. The Canada side of the
river looks dull enough from the city; but I cannot speak from a near
view of it, having been disappointed in my attempts to get over to it.
On one occasion, we were too late for the ferry-boat; and we never had
time again for the excursion.

A cool wind from the northern lakes blows over the whole face of the
country, in the midst of the hottest days of summer; and in the depth of
winter, the snow never lies deep, nor long. These circumstances may
partly account for the healthiness of the row of faces at the table of
the American.

The society of Detroit is very choice; and, as it has continued so since
the old colonial days, through the territorial days, there is every
reason to think that it will become, under its new dignities, a more and
more desirable place of residence. Some of its interior society is still
very youthful; a gentleman, for instance, saying in the reading-room, in
the hearing of one of our party, that, though it did not sound well at
a distance, Lynching[10] was the only way to treat Abolitionists: but
the most enlightened society is, I believe, equal to any which is to be
found in the United States. Here we began to see some of the
half-breeds, of whom we afterwards met so many at the north. They are
the children of white men who have married squaws; and may be known at a
glance, not only by the dark complexion, but by the high cheekbones,
straight black hair, and an indescribable mischievous expression about
the eyes. I never saw such imps and Flibbertigibbets as the half-breed
boys that we used to see rowing or diving in the waters, or playing
pranks on the shores of Michigan.

We had two great pleasures this day; a drive along the quiet Lake St.
Clair, and a charming evening party at General Mason's. After a
pilgrimage through the State of New York, a few exciting days at
Niagara, and a disagreeable voyage along Lake Erie, we were prepared to
enjoy to the utmost the novelty of a good evening party; and we were as
merry as children at a ball. It was wholly unexpected to find ourselves
in accomplished society on the far side of Lake Erie; and there was
something stimulating in the contrast between the high civilisation of
the evening, and the primitive scenes that we were to plunge into the
next day. Though we had to pack up and write, and be off very early in
the morning, we were unable to persuade ourselves to go home till late;
and then we talked over Detroit as if we were wholly at leisure.

The scenery of Lake St. Clair was new to me. I had seen nothing in the
United States like its level green banks, with trees slanting over the
water, festooned with the wild vine; the groups of cattle beneath them;
the distant steam-boat, scarcely seeming to disturb the grey surface of
the still waters. This was the first of many scenes in Michigan which
made me think of Holland; though the day of canals has not yet arrived.

15th. An obliging girl at the American provided us with coffee and
biscuits at half-past five, by which time our "exclusive extra" was at
the door. Charley had lost his cap. It was impossible that he should go
bare-headed through the State; and it was lucky for us that a store was
already open where he was furnished in a trice with a willow-hat. The
brimming river was bright in the morning sun; and our road was, for a
mile or two, thronged with Indians. Some of the inhabitants of Detroit,
who knew the most about their dark neighbours, told me that they found
it impossible to be romantic about these poor creatures. We, however,
could not help feeling the excitement of the spectacle, when we saw them
standing in their singularly majestic attitudes by the road-side, or on
a rising ground: one, with a bunch of feathers tied at the back of the
head; another, with his arms folded in his blanket; and a third, with
her infant lashed to a board, and thus carried on her shoulders. Their
appearance was dreadfully squalid.

As soon as we had entered the woods, the roads became as bad as, I
suppose, roads ever are. Something snapped, and the driver cried out
that we were "broke to bits." The team-bolt had given way. Our
gentlemen, and those of the mail-stage, which happened to be at hand,
helped to mend the coach; and we ladies walked on, gathering abundance
of flowers, and picking our way along the swampy corduroy road. In less
than an hour, the stage took us up, and no more accidents happened
before breakfast. We were abundantly amused while our meal was preparing
at Danversville. One of the passengers of the mail-stage took up a
violin, and offered to play to us. Books with pictures were lying about.
The lady of the house sat by the window, fixing her candle-wicks into
the moulds. In the piazza, sat a party of emigrants, who interested us
much. The wife had her eight children with her; the youngest, puny
twins. She said she had brought them in a wagon four hundred miles; and
if they could only live through the one hundred that remained before
they reached her husband's lot of land, she hoped they might thrive; but
she had been robbed, the day before, of her bundle of baby things. Some
one had stolen it from the wagon. After a good meal, we saw the
stage-passengers stowed into a lumber wagon; and we presently followed
in our more comfortable vehicle.

Before long, something else snapped. The splinter-bar was broken. The
driver was mortified; but it was no fault of his. Juggernaut's car would
have been "broke to bits" on such a road. We went into a settler's
house, where we were welcomed to rest and refresh ourselves. Three years
before, the owner bought his eighty acres of land for a dollar an acre.
He could now sell it for twenty dollars an acre. He shot, last year, a
hundred deer, and sold them for three dollars a-piece. He and his family
need have no fears of poverty. We dined well, nine miles before reaching
Ypsilanti. The log-houses,--always comfortable when well made, being
easily kept clean, cool in summer, and warm in winter,--have here an air
of beauty about them. The hue always harmonizes well with the soil and
vegetation. Those in Michigan have the bark left on, and the corners
sawn off close; and are thus both picturesque and neat.

At Ypsilanti, I picked up an Ann Arbor newspaper. It was badly printed;
but its contents were pretty good; and it could happen nowhere out of
America, that so raw a settlement as that at Ann Arbor, where there is
difficulty in procuring decent accommodations, should have a newspaper.

It was past seven before we left the inn at Ypsilanti, to go thirteen
miles further. We departed on foot. There was a bridge building at
Ypsilanti; but, till it was ready, all vehicles had to go a mile down
the water-side to the ferry, while the passengers generally preferred
crossing the foot-bridge, and walking on through the wood. We found in
our path, lupins, wild geraniums, blue-eye grass, blue iris, wild
sunflower, and many others. The mild summer night was delicious, after
the fatigues of the day. I saw the youngest of golden moons, and two
bright stars set, before we reached Wallace's Tavern, where we were to
sleep. Of course, we were told that there was no room for us; but, by a
little coaxing and management, and one of the party consenting to sleep
on the parlour-floor, everything was made easy.

16th. We were off by half-past six; and, not having rested quite enough,
and having the prospect of fourteen miles before breakfast, we, with one
accord, finished our sleep in the stage. We reached Tecumseh by
half-past nine, and perceived that its characteristic was chair-making.
Every other house seemed to be a chair manufactory. One bore the
inscription, "Cousin George's Store:" the meaning of which I do not
pretend to furnish. Perhaps the idea is, that purchasers may feel free
and easy, as if dealing with cousin George. Everybody has a cousin
George. Elsewhere, we saw a little hotel inscribed, "Our House;" a
prettier sign than "Traveller's Rest," or any other such tempting
invitation that I am acquainted with. At Tecumseh, I saw the first
strawberries of the season. All that I tasted in Michigan, of prairie
growth, were superior to those of the west, grown in gardens.

Charley was delighted to-day by the sight of several spotted fawns,
tamed by children. If a fawn be carried a hundred yards from its bush,
it will follow the finder, and remain with him, if kindly treated. They
are prettiest when very young, as they afterwards lose their spots.

We fairly entered the "rolling country" to-day: and nothing could be
brighter and more flourishing than it looked. The young corn was coming
up well in the settlers' fields. The copses, called "oak-openings,"
looked fresh after the passing thunder-showers; and so did the rising
grounds, strewed with wild flowers and strawberries. "The little hills
rejoiced on every side." The ponds, gleaming between the hills and
copses, gave a park-like air to the scenery. The settlers leave trees in
their clearings; and from these came the song of the wood-thrush; and
from the dells the cry of the quail. There seemed to be a gay
wood-pecker to every tree.

Our only accident to-day was driving over a poor hog: we can only hope
it died soon. Wherever we stopped, we found that the crowds of emigrants
had eaten up all the eggs; and we happened to think eggs the best
article of diet of all on a journey. It occurred to me that we might get
some by the way, and carry them on to our resting-place. All agreed
that we might probably procure them: but how to carry them safely over
such roads was the question. This day we resolved to try. We made a
solemn stir for eggs in a small settlement; and procured a dozen. We
each carried one in each hand,--except Charley, who was too young to be
trusted. His two were wrapped up each in a bag. During eight miles of
jolting, not one was hurt; and we delivered them to our host at
Jonesville with much satisfaction. We wished that some of our
entertainers had been as rich as a Frenchman at Baltimore, who, talking
of his poultry-yard, informed a friend that he had "fifty head of hen."

At Jonesville, the ladies and Charley were favoured with a large and
comfortable chamber. The gentlemen had to sleep with the multitude
below; ranged like walking-sticks, or umbrellas, on a shop-counter.

17th. The road was more deplorable than ever to-day. The worst of it
was, that whenever it was dangerous for the carriage, so that we were
obliged to get out, it was, in proportion, difficult to be passed on
foot. It was amusing to see us in such passes as we had to go through
to-day. I generally acted as pioneer, the gentlemen having their ladies
to assist; and it was pleasant to stand on some dry perch, and watch my
companions through the holes and pools that I had passed. Such hopping
and jumping; such slipping and sliding; such looks of despair from the
middle of a pond; such shifting of logs, and carrying of planks, and
handing along the fallen trunks of trees! The driver, meantime, was
looking back provokingly from his box, having dragged the carriage
through; and far behind stood Charley, high and dry, singing or eating
his bit of bread, till his father could come back for him. Three times
this day was such a scene enacted; and, the third time, there was a
party of emigrant ladies to be assisted, too. When it was all over, and
I saw one with her entire feet cased in mud, I concluded we must all be
very wet, and looked at my own shoes: and lo! even the soles were as dry
as when they were made! How little the worst troubles of travelling
amount to, in proportion to the apprehension of them! What a world of
anxiety do travellers suffer lest they should get wet, or be without
food! How many really faint with hunger, or fall into an ague with damp
and cold? I was never in danger of either the one or the other, in any
of the twenty-three States which I visited.

At one part of our journey to-day, where the road was absolutely
impassable, we went above a mile through the wood, where there was no
track, but where the trees are blazed, to serve as guide-posts, summer
and winter. It was very wild. Our carriage twisted and wound about to
avoid blows against the noble beech-stems. The waters of the swamp
plashed under our wheels, and the boughs crunched overhead. An overturn
would have been a disaster in such a place. We travelled only forty-two
miles this long day; but the weariness of the way was much beguiled by
singing, by a mock oration, story-telling, and other such amusements.
The wit and humour of Americans, abundant under ordinary circumstances,
are never, I believe, known to fail in emergencies, serious or trifling.
Their humour helps themselves and their visitors through any Sloughs of
Despond, as charitably as their infinite abundance of logs through the
swamps of their bad roads.

We did not reach Sturgis's Prairie till night. We had heard so poor an
account of the stage-house, that we proceeded to another, whose owner
has the reputation of treating his guests magnificently, or not at all.
He treated us on _juste milieu_ principles. He did what he could for us;
and that could not be called magnificent. The house was crowded with
emigrants. When, after three hours waiting, we had supper, two
full-grown persons were asleep on some blankets in the corner of the
room, and as many as fifteen or sixteen children on chairs and on the
floor. Our hearts ached for one mother. Her little girl, two years old,
had either sprained or broken her arm, and the mother did not know what
to do with it. The child shrieked when the arm was touched, and wailed
mournfully at other times. We found in the morning, however, that she
had had some sleep. I have often wondered since how she bore the motion
of the wagon on the worst parts of the road. It was oppressively hot. I
had a little closet, whose door would not shut, and which was too small
to give me room to take off the soft feather-bed. The window would not
keep open without being propped by the tin water-jug; and though this
was done, I could not sleep for the heat. This reminds me of the
considerate kindness of an hotel-keeper in an earlier stage of our
journey. When he found that I wished to have my window open, there being
no fastening, he told me he would bring his own tooth-brush for a
prop,--which he accordingly did.

18th. Our drive of twelve miles to breakfast was very refreshing. The
roads were the best we had travelled since we left New York State. We
passed through a wilderness of flowers; trailing roses, enormous white
convolvulus, scarlet lilies, and ground-ivy, with many others, being
added to those we had before seen. Milton must have travelled in
Michigan before he wrote the garden parts of "Paradise Lost." Sturgis's
and White Pigeon Prairies are highly cultivated, and look just like any
other rich and perfectly level land. We breakfasted at White Pigeon
Prairie, and saw the rising ground where the Indian chief lies buried,
whose name has been given to the place.

The charms of the settlement, to us, were a kind landlady, an admirable
breakfast, at which eggs abounded, and a blooming garden. Thirty-seven
miles further brought us to Niles, where we arrived by five in the
afternoon. The roads were so much improved that we had not to walk at
all; which was well, as there was much pelting rain during the day.

Niles is a thriving town on the river St. Joseph, on the borders of the
Potowatomie territory. Three years ago, it consisted of three houses. We
could not learn the present number of inhabitants; probably because the
number is never the same two days together. A Potowatomie village stands
within a mile; and we saw two Indians on horseback, fording the rapid
river very majestically, and ascending the wooded hills on the other
side. Many Indian women were about the streets; one with a nose-ring;
some with plates of silver on the bosom, and other barbaric ornaments.
Such a tremendous storm of thunder and lightning came on, with a deluge
of rain, that we were prevented seeing anything of the place, except
from our windows. I had sent my boots to a cobbler, over the way. He had
to put on India rubbers, which reached above the knee, to bring his work
home; the street was so flooded. We little imagined for the hour the
real extent and violence of this storm, and the effect it would have on
our journeying.

The prairie strawberries, at breakfast this morning, were so large,
sweet, and ripe, that we were inclined for more in the course of the
day. Many of the children of the settlers were dispersed near the
road-side, with their baskets, gathering strawberries; they would not
sell any: they did not know what mother would say if they went home
without any berries for father. But they could get enough for father,
too, they were told, if they would sell us what they had already
gathered. No; they did not want to sell. Our driver observed, that money
was "no object to them." I began to think that we had, at last, got to
the end of the world; or rather, perhaps, to the beginning of another
and a better.

19th. No plan could be more cleverly and confidently laid than ours was
for this day's journey. We were to travel through the lands of the
Potowatomies, and reach the shores of the glorious Lake Michigan, at
Michigan City, in time for an early supper. We were to proceed on the
morrow round the southern extremity of the lake, so as, if possible, to
reach Chicago in one day. It was wisely and prettily planned: and the
plan was so far followed, as that we actually did leave Niles some time
before six in the morning. Within three minutes, it began to rain again,
and continued, with but few and short intervals, all day.

We crossed the St. Joseph by a rope ferry, the ingenious management of
which, when stage-coaches had to be carried over, was a perpetual study
to me. The effect of crossing a rapid river by a rope-ferry, by
torch-light, in a dark night, is very striking; and not the less so for
one's becoming familiarized with it, as the traveller does in the United
States. As we drove up the steep bank, we found ourselves in the Indian
territory. All was very wild; and the more so for the rain. There were
many lodges in the glades, with the red light of fires hanging around
them. The few log huts looked drenched; the tree-stems black in the wet;
and the very wild flowers were dripping. The soil was sandy; so that the
ugliest features of a rainy day, the mud and puddles, were obviated.
The sand sucked up the rain, so that we jumped out of the carriage as
often as a wild-flower of peculiar beauty tempted us. The bride-like,
white convolvulus, nearly as large as my hand, grew in trails all over
the ground.

The poor, helpless, squalid Potowatomies are sadly troubled by
squatters. It seems hard enough that they should be restricted within a
narrow territory, so surrounded by whites that the game is sure soon to
disappear, and leave them stripped of their only resource. It is too
hard that they should also be encroached upon by men who sit down,
without leave or title, upon lands which are not intended for sale. I
enjoyed hearing of an occasional alarm among the squatters, caused by
some threatening demonstrations by the Indians. I should like to see
every squatter frightened away from Indian lands, however advantageous
their squatting may be upon lands which are unclaimed, or whose owners
can defend their own property. I was glad to hear to-day that a
deputation of Potowatomies had been sent to visit a distant warlike
tribe, in consequence of the importunities of squatters, who wanted to
buy the land they had been living upon. The deputation returned,
painted, and under other hostile signals, and declared that the
Potowatomies did not intend to part with their lands. We stopped for
some milk, this morning, at the "location" of a squatter, whose wife was
milking as we passed. The gigantic personage, her husband, told us how
anxious he was to pay for the land which repaid his tillage so well; but
that his Indian neighbours would not sell. I hope that, by this time, he
has had to remove, and leave them the benefit of his house and fences.
Such an establishment in the wild woods is the destruction of the
game,--and of those who live upon it.

At breakfast, we saw a fine specimen of a settler's family. We had
observed the prosperity and cheerfulness of the settlers, all along the
road; but this family exceeded the best. I never saw such an
affectionate set of people. They, like many others, were from one of the
southern States: and I was not surprised to find all emigrants from
North and South Carolina well satisfied with the change they had made.
The old lady seemed to enjoy her pipe, and there was much mirth going on
between the beautiful daughter and all the other men and maidens. They
gave us an excellent breakfast in one of the two lower rooms; the table
being placed across the foot of the two beds. No pains were spared by
them to save us from the wet in the stage; but the rain was too pelting
and penetrating for any defence to avail long. It streamed in at all
corners, and we gave the matter up for the day. We were now entering
Indiana; and one of our intentions had been to see the celebrated Door
Prairie; so called from exquisite views into it being opened through
intervals in the growth of wood with which it is belted. I did obtain
something like an idea of it through the reeking rain, and thought that
it was the first prairie that I had seen that answered to my idea of
one. But I dare say we formed no conception of what it must be in
sunshine, and with the cloud shadows, which adorn a prairie as they do
still water.

We reached Laporte, on the edge of the Door Prairie, at three o'clock,
and were told that the weather did not promise an easy access to
Michigan City. We changed horses, however, and set forward again on a
very bad road, along the shore of a little lake, which must be pretty in
fine weather. Then we entered a wood, and jolted and rocked from side to
side, till, at last, the carriage leaned three parts over, and stuck. We
all jumped out into the rain, and the gentlemen literally put their
shoulders to the wheel, and lifted it out of its hole. The same little
incident was repeated in half an hour. At five or six miles from
Laporte, and seven from Michigan City, our driver stopped, and held a
long parley with somebody by the road side. The news was that a bridge
in the middle of a marsh had been carried away by a tremendous freshet;
and with how much log-road on either side, could not be ascertained till
the waters should subside. The mails, however, would have to be carried
over, by some means, the next day; and we must wait where we were till
we could profit by the post-office experiment. The next question was,
where were we to be harboured? There was no house of entertainment near.
We shrank from going back to Laporte over the perilous road which was
growing worse every minute. A family lived at hand, who hospitably
offered to receive us; and we were only too ready to accept their
kindness. The good man stopped our acknowledgments by saying, in the
most cheerful manner, "You know you would not have staid with me, if you
could have helped it; and I would not have had you, if I could have
helped it: so no more words about it; but let us make ourselves
comfortable."

We perceived by a glance at the beard and costume of